=head1 NAME

nbdkit-vddk-plugin - nbdkit VMware VDDK plugin

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbdkit vddk [file=]FILENAME
             [compression=none|zlib|fastlz|skipz]
             [config=FILENAME] [cookie=COOKIE] [libdir=LIBRARY]
             [nfchostport=PORT] [single-link=true]
             [password=PASSWORD | password=- | password=+FILENAME |
              password=-FD]
             [port=PORT] [server=HOSTNAME] [snapshot=MOREF]
             [thumbprint=THUMBPRINT] [transports=MODE:MODE:...]
             [unbuffered=true] [user=USERNAME] [vm=moref=ID]
 nbdkit vddk --dump-plugin

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<nbdkit-vddk-plugin> is an L<nbdkit(1)> plugin that serves disks from
local VMware VMDK files, VMware ESXi servers, VMware VCenter servers,
and other sources.

It requires VMware's proprietary VDDK library that you must download
yourself (see L</LIBRARY LOCATION> below).

=head1 EXAMPLES

=head2 Open a local VMDK file

 nbdkit vddk /absolute/path/to/file.vmdk

When opening local files the filename B<must> be an absolute path.

Because VDDK needs to lock the file, the file must be on a writable
filesystem.  You can avoid this by opening the file read-only (the
I<-r> option):

 nbdkit -r vddk /absolute/path/to/file.vmdk

=head2 Open a file on a remote VMware ESXi hypervisor

Connect directly to a VMware ESXi hypervisor and export a particular
file:

 nbdkit vddk user=root password=+/tmp/rootpw \
             server=esxi.example.com thumbprint=xx:xx:xx:... \
             vm=moref=2 \
             "[datastore1] Fedora/Fedora.vmdk"

C<user> and C<password> must be specified.  Use C<password=+FILENAME>
to provide the password securely in a file.

C<server> is the hostname of the ESXi server.

C<thumbprint> is the thumb print for validating the SSL certificate.
How to find the thumb print of a server is described in
L</THUMBPRINTS> below.

C<vm> is the Managed Object Reference ("moref") of the virtual
machine.  See L</MANAGED OBJECT REFERENCE> below.

The file parameter is the file you want to open, usually in the form
S<C<"[datastore] vmname/vmname.vmdk">>.  See L</FILE PARAMETER> below.

=head2 Open a file on a remote VMware vCenter server

Connect via VMware vCenter and export a particular file:

 nbdkit vddk user=root password=vmware \
             server=vcenter.example.com thumbprint=xx:xx:xx:... \
             vm=moref=vm-16 \
             "[datastore1] Fedora/Fedora.vmdk"

C<user> and C<password> must be specified.  Use C<password=+FILENAME>
to provide the password securely in a file.

C<server> is the hostname of the vCenter server.

C<thumbprint> is the thumb print for validating the SSL certificate.
How to find the thumb print of a server is described in
L</THUMBPRINTS> below.

C<vm> is the Managed Object Reference ("moref") of the virtual
machine.  See L</MANAGED OBJECT REFERENCE> below.

The file parameter is the file you want to open, usually in the form
S<C<"[datastore] vmname/vmname.vmdk">>.  See L</FILE PARAMETER> below.

=head1 PARAMETERS

For opening a local VMDK file, the C<file> parameter is required and
must be an absolute path.

For opening a remote connection, C<file>, C<server>, C<thumbprint>,
C<user>, C<password> and C<vm> are required.

All other parameters are optional.

=over 4

=item B<compression=none>

=item B<compression=zlib>

=item B<compression=fastlz>

=item B<compression=skipz>

(nbdkit E<ge> 1.24, vSphere E<ge> 6.5)

Select the compression type used over the network between VDDK and the
VMware server.  The default is C<none>.  See VMware document “Best
Practices for NBD Transport”.

=item B<config=>FILENAME

The name of the VDDK configuration file.

The config file controls rarely adjusted VDDK settings like log level,
caching and timeouts.  See the VDDK documentation for a full list of
settings.

VDDK itself looks in a few default locations for the configuration
file, usually including F</etc/vmware/config> and
F<$HOME/.vmware/config>.  Using C<config> overrides these defaults.

=item B<cookie=>COOKIE

(vSphere E<ge> 6.7)

Cookie from existing authenticated session on the host.

This changes the authentication type from C<VIXDISKLIB_CRED_UID> to
C<VIXDISKLIB_CRED_SESSIONID> which can improve performance.  The
cookie can be found by connecting to a VCenter Server over HTTPS and
retrieving the C<vmware_soap_session> cookie.

=item [B<file=>]FILENAME

=item [B<file=>]B<[>datastoreB<] >vmname/vmnameB<.vmdk>

Set the name of the VMDK file to serve.

For local files you B<must> supply an absolute path.
For remote files see L</FILE PARAMETER> section below.

If a VM has multiple disks, nbdkit can only serve one at a time.  To
serve more than one you must run multiple copies of nbdkit.  (See
L</NOTES> below).

C<file=> is a magic config key and may be omitted in most cases.
See L<nbdkit(1)/Magic parameters>.

=item B<libdir=>PATHNAME

This sets the path of the VMware VDDK distribution.

VDDK uses this to load its own plugins, if this path is unspecified or
wrong then VDDK will work with reduced functionality.  See
L</LIBRARY LOCATION> below.

=item B<nfchostport=>PORT

Port used to establish an NFC connection to ESXi.  Defaults to 902.

=item B<password=>PASSWORD

Set the password to use when connecting to the remote server.

Note that passing this on the command line is not secure on shared
machines.

=item B<password=->

Ask for the password (interactively) when nbdkit starts up.

=item B<password=+>FILENAME

Read the password from the named file.  This is a secure method
to supply a password, as long as you set the permissions on the file
appropriately.

=item B<password=->FD

Read the password from file descriptor number C<FD>, inherited from
the parent process when nbdkit starts up.  This is also a secure
method to supply a password.

=item B<port=>PORT

The port on the VCenter/ESXi host.  Defaults to 443.

=item B<server=>HOSTNAME

The hostname or IP address of VCenter or ESXi host.

=item B<single-link=true>

(nbdkit E<ge> 1.12)

Open the current link, not the entire chain.  This corresponds to the
C<VIXDISKLIB_FLAG_OPEN_SINGLE_LINK> flag.

=item B<snapshot=>MOREF

The Managed Object Reference of the snapshot.
See L</MANAGED OBJECT REFERENCE> below.

=item B<thumbprint=>THUMBPRINT

The SSL (SHA1) thumbprint for validating the SSL certificate.

The format is
C<xx:xx:xx:xx:xx:xx:xx:xx:xx:xx:xx:xx:xx:xx:xx:xx:xx:xx:xx:xx>
(20 hex digit pairs).

See L</THUMBPRINTS> below for how to get this.

=item B<transports=>MODEB<:>MODEB<:>...

List of one or more transport modes to use.  Possible values include
‘nbd’, ‘nbdssl’, ‘san’, ‘hotadd’, ‘file’ (there may be others).  If
not given, VDDK will try to choose the best transport mode.

=item B<unbuffered=true>

(nbdkit E<ge> 1.12)

Disable host caching.  This corresponds to the
C<VIXDISKLIB_FLAG_OPEN_UNBUFFERED> flag.

=item B<user=>USERNAME

The username to connect to the remote server as.

=item B<vm=moref=>ID

The Managed Object Reference ("moref") of the virtual machine.
See L</MANAGED OBJECT REFERENCE> below.

=item B<vimapiver=>APIVER

This parameter is ignored for backwards compatibility.

=back

=head1 LIBRARY LOCATION

The VDDK library should B<not> be placed on a system library path such
as F</usr/lib>.  The reason is that the VDDK library ships with
recompiled libraries like F<libcrypto.so> and F<libstdc++.so> that
conflict with system libraries.

You have two choices:

=over 4

=item *

Place VDDK in the default libdir which is compiled into this plugin,
for example:

 $ nbdkit vddk --dump-plugin | grep ^vddk_default_libdir
 vddk_default_libdir=/usr/lib64/vmware-vix-disklib

=item *

But the best advice is to unpack the VDDK tarball anywhere you like
and set the C<libdir=/path/to/vmware-vix-disklib-distrib>.  For
example:

 nbdkit vddk \
        libdir=/opt/vmware-vix-disklib-distrib \
        /path/to/file.vmdk

=back

=head2 No need to set C<LD_LIBRARY_PATH>

In nbdkit E<le> 1.16 you had to set the environment variable
C<LD_LIBRARY_PATH> when using this plugin.  In nbdkit E<ge> 1.18 this
is I<not> recommended.

=head1 FILE PARAMETER

The C<file> parameter can either be a local file, in which case it
must be the absolute path.  Or it can refer to a remote file on the
VMware server in the format S<C<"[datastore] vmname/vmname.vmdk">>.

=head2 Finding the remote filename

For remote files you can find the path using L<virsh(1)>.  For ESXi:

 $ virsh -c 'esx://esxi.example.com?no_verify=1' dumpxml guestname
 ...
  <disk type='file' device='disk'>
    <source file='[datastore] vmname/vmname.vmdk'/>
 ...

For vCenter the command is the same but the URI starts with C<vpx://>:

 $ virsh -c 'vpx://vcenter.example.com/Datacenter/esxi.example.com?no_verify=1' \
         dumpxml guestname

See also: L<https://libvirt.org/drvesx.html>

=head2 Optional file= prefix

The C<file=> part is optional, so these commands are equivalent:

 nbdkit vddk file=/path/to/file.vmdk
 nbdkit vddk /path/to/file.vmdk

=head1 THUMBPRINTS

The thumbprint is a 20 byte string containing the SSL (SHA1)
fingerprint of the remote VMware server and it is required when making
a remote connection.  There are several ways to obtain this.

=head2 Using a web browser

Visit C<https://SERVER-NAME/folder> and log in.  Click the lock icon
next to the URL bar and navigate to the SHA-1 fingerprint of the
site’s certificate.  This 20 hex digit pair string can be directly
copied to the C<thumbprint=> parameter.

=head2 Using openssl remotely

The following command will print the thumbprint of a VMware server
called C<SERVER-NAME>:

 $ openssl s_client -connect SERVER-NAME:443 </dev/null |
   openssl x509 -in /dev/stdin -fingerprint -sha1 -noout

=head2 By logging in to the ESXi or vCenter server

Log in to the ESXi hypervisor shell and run this command:

 # openssl x509 -in /etc/vmware/ssl/rui.crt -fingerprint -sha1 -noout

For VMware vCenter servers the thumbprint is printed on the text
console of the server or is available by logging in to the server and
using this command:

 # openssl x509 -in /etc/vmware-vpx/ssl/rui.crt -fingerprint -sha1 -noout

=head2 Trick: Get VDDK to tell you the thumbprint

Another way to get the thumbprint of a server is to connect to the
server using a bogus thumbprint with debugging enabled:

 nbdkit -U - -fv vddk server=esxi.example.com [...] thumbprint=12 \
        --run 'qemu-img info "$uri"'

The nbdkit process will try to connect (and fail because the
thumbprint is wrong).  However in the debug output will be a message
such as this:

 nbdkit: debug: VixDiskLibVim: Failed to verify SSL certificate: actual thumbprint=B2:31:BD:DE:9F:DB:9D:E0:78:EF:30:42:8A:41:B0:28:92:93:C8:DD expected=12

This gives you the server’s real thumbprint.  Of course this method is
not secure since it allows a Man-in-the-Middle (MITM) attack.

=head1 MANAGED OBJECT REFERENCE

Some use cases require you to pass in the Managed Object Reference
("moref") of an object on the VMware server.

For VMware ESXi hypervisors, the C<vm> moref is a number
(eg. C<vm=moref=2>).  For VMware VCenter it is a string beginning with
C<"vm-">) (eg. C<vm=moref=vm-16>).  Across ESXi and vCenter the
numbers are different even for the same virtual machine.

If you have libvirt E<ge> 3.7, the moref is available in the
L<virsh(1)> C<dumpxml> output:

 $ virsh -c 'esx://esxi.example.com?no_verify=1' dumpxml guestname
 ...
 <vmware:moref>2</vmware:moref>
 ...

or:

 $ virsh -c 'vpx://vcenter.example.com/Datacenter/esxi.example.com?no_verify=1' \
       dumpxml guestname
 ...
 <vmware:moref>vm-16</vmware:moref>
 ...

An alternative way to find the moref of a VM is using the
C<moRefFinder.pl> script written by William Lam
(L<http://www.virtuallyghetto.com/2011/11/vsphere-moref-managed-object-reference.html>
L<https://blogs.vmware.com/vsphere/2012/02/uniquely-identifying-virtual-machines-in-vsphere-and-vcloud-part-2-technical.html>).

=head1 DUMP-PLUGIN OUTPUT

To query more information about the plugin (and whether it is
working), use:

 nbdkit vddk --dump-plugin

or:

 nbdkit vddk --dump-plugin libdir=/opt/vmware-vix-disklib-distrib

(see L</LIBRARY LOCATION> above).

If the plugin is not present or not working you will get an error.

If it works the output will include:

=over 4

=item C<vddk_default_libdir=...>

The compiled-in library path.  Use C<libdir=PATHNAME> to override this
at runtime.

=item C<vddk_has_nfchostport=1>

If this is printed then the C<nfchostport=PORT> parameter is supported
by this build.

=item C<vddk_dll=...>

Prints the full path to the VDDK shared library.  Since this requires
a glibc extension it may not be available in all builds of the plugin.

=back

=head1 NOTES

=head2 Sector size limitation

The VDDK plugin can only answer read/write requests on whole 512 byte
sector boundaries.  This is because the VDDK Read and Write APIs only
take sector numbers.  If your client needs finer granularity, you can
use L<nbdkit-blocksize-filter(1)> with the setting C<minblock=512>.

=head2 Threads

Handling threads in the VDDK API is complex and does not map well to
any of the thread models offered by nbdkit (see
L<nbdkit-plugin(3)/THREADS>).  The plugin uses the nbdkit
C<SERIALIZE_REQUESTS> model, but technically even this is not
completely safe.  This is a subject of future work.

=head2 Out of memory errors

In the verbose log you may see errors like:

 nbdkit: vddk[3]: error: [NFC ERROR] NfcFssrvrProcessErrorMsg:
 received NFC error 5 from server: Failed to allocate the
 requested 2097176 bytes

This seems especially common when there are multiple parallel
connections open to the VMware server.

These can be caused by resource limits set on the VMware server.  You
can increase the limit for the NFC service by editing
F</etc/vmware/hostd/config.xml> and adjusting the
C<E<lt>maxMemoryE<gt>> setting:

 <nfcsvc>
   <path>libnfcsvc.so</path>
   <enabled>true</enabled>
   <maxMemory>50331648</maxMemory>
   <maxStreamMemory>10485760</maxStreamMemory>
 </nfcsvc>

and restarting the C<hostd> service:

 # /etc/init.d/hostd restart

For more information see L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1614276>.

=head1 SUPPORTED VERSIONS OF VDDK

This plugin requires VDDK E<ge> 5.5.5, which in turn means that it
is only supported on x64-64 platforms.

It has been tested with all versions up to 7.0.3 (but should work with
future versions).

VDDK E<ge> 6.0 should be used if possible.  This is the first version
which added Flush support which is crucial for data integrity when
writing.

VDDK 6.7 was the first version that supported the
C<VixDiskLib_QueryAllocatedBlocks> API, required to provide extent
information over NBD.

=head1 DEBUG FLAGS

Debugging messages can be very helpful if you have problems connecting
to VMware servers, or to find the list of available transport modes,
or to diagnose SAN problems:

 nbdkit -f -v vddk file=FILENAME [...]

Additional debug flags are available:

=over 4

=item B<-D vddk.diskinfo=1>

Debug disk information returned by C<GetInfo>.

=item B<-D vddk.extents=1>

Debug extents returned by C<QueryAllocatedBlocks>.

=item B<-D vddk.datapath=0>

Suppress debugging of datapath calls (C<Read> and C<Write>).

=item B<-D vddk.stats=1>

When the plugin exits print some statistics about each VDDK call.

=back

=head1 FILES

=over 4

=item F<$plugindir/nbdkit-vddk-plugin.so>

The plugin.

Use C<nbdkit --dump-config> to find the location of C<$plugindir>.

=back

=head1 VERSION

C<nbdkit-vddk-plugin> first appeared in nbdkit 1.2.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-plugin(3)>,
L<nbdkit-blocksize-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-readahead-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-retry-filter(1)>,
L<virsh(1)>,
L<https://libvirt.org/drvesx.html>,
L<https://www.vmware.com/support/developer/vddk/>,
VMware document “Best Practices for NBD Transport”.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2013-2020 Red Hat Inc.
