=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

nbdkit-pattern-plugin - plugin to serve a fixed pattern of data for testing

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbdkit pattern size=SIZE

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<nbdkit-pattern-plugin> is a plugin for L<nbdkit(1)> which serves a
fixed pattern of data, read only.  This is used for testing nbdkit
filters and NBD clients.

The fixed pattern is the offset, as a 64 bit big endian integer, every
8 bytes.  In hexadecimal this looks like:

 offset                         data
  0000:   00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00   00 00 00 00 00 00 00 08
  0010:   00 00 00 00 00 00 00 10   00 00 00 00 00 00 00 18
  0020:   00 00 00 00 00 00 00 20   00 00 00 00 00 00 00 28
                                    └──────────┬──────────┘
             64 bit big endian int which encodes the offset of
             the first byte of this int in the file

The size of the virtual disk must be specified using the C<size>
parameter.  If the size is not a multiple of 8 then the last 8 byte
offset in the pattern is truncated.

=head1 PARAMETERS

=over 4

=item B<size=SIZE>

Specify the virtual size of the disk image.

This parameter is required.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-plugin(3)>,
L<nbdkit-null-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-offset-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-random-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-zero-plugin(1)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2018 Red Hat Inc.

=head1 LICENSE

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
met:

=over 4

=item *

Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

=item *

Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

=item *

Neither the name of Red Hat nor the names of its contributors may be
used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without
specific prior written permission.

=back

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY RED HAT AND CONTRIBUTORS ''AS IS'' AND
ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL RED HAT OR
CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF
USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND
ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
SUCH DAMAGE.
