=head1 NAME

nbdkit-nbd-plugin - proxy / forward to another NBD server

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbdkit nbd { command=COMMAND [arg=ARG [...]] |
              hostname=HOST [port=PORT] |
              vhost-cid=CID [port=PORT] |
              socket=SOCKNAME |
              socket-fd=FD |
              [uri=]URI }
            [export=NAME] [retry=N] [shared=BOOL]
            [tls=MODE] [tls-certificates=DIR] [tls-verify=BOOL]
            [tls-username=NAME] [tls-psk=FILE]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<nbdkit-nbd-plugin> is a plugin for L<nbdkit(1)> that lets you
forward the connection to another NBD server.  There are several uses
for this plugin:

=over 4

=item *

Adjust the set of features seen by the ultimate NBD client without
having to change the original server.  For example, convert between
the oldstyle and newstyle protocols, or add TLS support if the
original server lacks it.

=item *

Apply nbdkit filters to any other NBD server.

=item *

With L<qemu-nbd(8)>, read and write qcow2 files with nbdkit.

=back

=head1 PARAMETERS

One of B<socket>, B<hostname> (optionally with B<port>), B<vsock>
(optionally with B<port>), B<uri>, B<socket-fd> or B<command> must be
given to specify which NBD server to forward to:

=over 4

=item B<command=>COMMAND

=item B<arg=>ARG

Run an NBD server, usually L<qemu-nbd(8)>, as an external command.
See L</EXAMPLES> below.

C<COMMAND> is the program to run, followed by zero or more C<arg=ARG>
parameters for each argument.  For example:

 nbdkit nbd command=qemu-nbd arg=-f arg=qcow2 arg=$PWD/disk.qcow2

would run the command C<qemu-nbd -f qcow2 $PWD/disk.qcow2>.  Because
nbdkit may change directory before running the command, you may need
to ensure that all file paths used in parameters (like the disk name
above) are absolute paths.

This uses the libnbd API L<nbd_connect_systemd_socket_activation(3)>.
This option implies C<shared=true>.

=item B<hostname=>HOST

=item B<port=>PORT

Connect to the NBD server at the remote C<HOST> using a TCP socket.
The optional port parameter overrides the default port (10809), and
may be a 16-bit number or a non-numeric string to look up the
well-known port for a service name.

=item B<vsock=>CID

=item B<port=>PORT

Connect to the NBD server at the given vsock C<CID> (for example, in a
guest VM, using the cid 2 will connect to a server in the host).  The
optional port parameter overrides the default port (10809), and must
be a 32-bit number.  This only works for platforms with the
C<AF_VSOCK> family of sockets and libnbd new enough to use it;
C<nbdkit --dump-plugin nbd> will contain C<libnbd_vsock=1> if this is
the case.  For more details on AF_VSOCK, see
L<nbdkit-service(1)/AF_VSOCK>.

=item B<socket=>SOCKNAME

Connect to the NBD server using Unix domain socket C<SOCKNAME>.

=item B<socket-fd=>FD

Connect to the NBD server over a socket file descriptor inherited by
nbdkit.  This uses the libnbd API L<nbd_connect_socket(3)>.  This
option implies C<shared=true>.

=item [B<uri=>]URI

When C<uri> is supplied, decode C<URI> to determine the address to
connect to.  A URI can specify a TCP connection (such as
C<nbd://localhost:10809/export>), a Unix socket (such as
C<nbd+unix:///export?socket=/path/to/sock>), or a vsock connection
(such as C<nbd+vsock:///2:10809/export>).  Remember you may need to
quote the parameter to protect it from the shell.

The C<uri> parameter is only available when the plugin was compiled
against libnbd with URI support; C<nbdkit --dump-plugin nbd> will
contain C<libnbd_uri=1> if this is the case.

C<uri=> is a magic config key and may be omitted in most
cases.  See L<nbdkit(1)/Magic parameters>.

=back

Other parameters control the NBD connection:

=over 4

=item B<export=>NAME

If this parameter is given, and the server speaks new style protocol,
then connect to the named export instead of the default export (the
empty string).  If C<uri> is supplied, the export name should be
embedded in the URI instead.

=item B<retry=>N

If the initial connection attempt to the server fails, retry up to
C<N> times more after a one-second delay between tries (default 0).

=item B<shared=false>

=item B<shared=true>

If using C<command> or C<socket-fd> modes then this defaults to true,
otherwise false.

If false the plugin will open a new connection to the server for each
client making a connection to nbdkit.  The remote server does not have
to be started until immediately before the first nbdkit client
connects.

If this parameter is set to C<true>, the plugin will open a single
connection to the server when nbdkit is first started (the C<retry>
parameter may be necessary to coordinate timing of the remote server
startup), and all clients to nbdkit will share that single connection.

=item B<tls=off>

=item B<tls=on>

=item B<tls=require>

Selects which TLS mode to use with the server.  If no other tls option
is present, this defaults to C<off>, where the client does not attempt
encryption (and may be rejected by a server that requires it).  If
omitted but another tls option is present, this defaults to C<on>,
where the client opportunistically attempts a TLS handshake, but will
continue running unencrypted if the server does not support
encryption.  If set to C<require> or if the C<uri> parameter is used
with a scheme that requires encryption (such as C<nbds://host>), then
this requires an encrypted connection to the server.

The C<tls> parameter is only available when the plugin was compiled
against libnbd with TLS support; C<nbdkit --dump-plugin nbd> will
contain C<libnbd_tls=1> if this is the case.  Note the difference
between C<--tls=...> controlling what nbdkit serves, and C<tls=...>
controlling what the nbd plugin connects to as a client.

=item B<tls-certificates=>DIR

This specifies the directory containing X.509 client certificates to
present to the server.

=item B<tls-verify=false>

Setting this parameter to false disables server name verification,
which opens you to potential Man-in-the-Middle (MITM) attacks, but
allows for a simpler setup for distributing certificates.

=item B<tls-username=>NAME

If provided, this overrides the user name to present to the server
alongside the certificate.

=item B<tls-psk=>FILE

If provided, this is the filename containing the Pre-Shared Keys (PSK)
to present to the server.  While this is easier to set up than X.509,
it requires that the PSK file be transmitted over a secure channel.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

=head2 Convert oldstyle server to encrypted newstyle

Expose the contents of an export served by an old style server over a
Unix socket to TCP network clients that only want to consume encrypted
data.  Use I<--exit-with-parent> to clean up nbdkit at the same time
that the old server exits.

 ( sock=`mktemp -u`
   nbdkit --exit-with-parent --tls=require nbd socket=$sock &
   exec /path/to/oldserver --socket=$sock )

 ┌────────────┐   TLS    ┌────────┐  plaintext  ┌────────────┐
 │ new client │ ────────▶│ nbdkit │ ───────────▶│ old server │
 └────────────┘   TCP    └────────┘    Unix     └────────────┘

=head2 Use qemu-nbd to open a qcow2 file

Run qemu-nbd as the server, allowing you to read and write qcow2 files
(since nbdkit does not have a native qcow2 plugin).  This allows you
to use nbdkit filters on top, see the next example.

 nbdkit nbd command=qemu-nbd arg=-f arg=qcow2 arg=/path/to/image.qcow2

qemu-nbd is cleaned up when nbdkit exits.

=head2 Add nbdkit-partition-filter to qemu-nbd

Combine L<nbdkit-partition-filter(1)> with L<qemu-nbd(8)>’s ability to
visit qcow2 files:

 nbdkit --filter=partition nbd \
        command=qemu-nbd arg=-f arg=qcow2 arg=/path/to/image.qcow2 \
        partition=1

This performs the same task as the deprecated qemu-nbd I<-P> option:

 qemu-nbd -P 1 -f qcow2 /path/to/image.qcow2

=head2 Convert newstyle server for oldstyle-only client

Expose the contents of export C<foo> from a newstyle server with
encrypted data to a client that can only consume unencrypted old
style.  Use I<--run> to clean up nbdkit at the time the client exits.
In general, note that it is best to keep the plaintext connection
limited to a Unix socket on the local machine.

 nbdkit -U - -o --tls=off nbd hostname=example.com export=foo tls=require \
  --run '/path/to/oldclient --socket=$unixsocket'

 ┌────────────┐  plaintext  ┌────────┐   TLS    ┌────────────┐
 │ old client │ ───────────▶│ nbdkit │ ────────▶│ new server │
 └────────────┘    Unix     └────────┘   TCP    └────────────┘

=head1 DUMP PLUGIN OUTPUT

You can learn which features are provided by libnbd by inspecting the
C<libnbd_*> lines in I<--dump-plugin> output:

 $ nbdkit --dump-plugin nbd
 [...]
 libnbd_version=1.2.3
 libnbd_tls=1
 libnbd_uri=1

=head1 FILES

=over 4

=item F<$plugindir/nbdkit-nbd-plugin.so>

The plugin.

Use C<nbdkit --dump-config> to find the location of C<$plugindir>.

=back

=head1 VERSION

C<nbdkit-nbd-plugin> first appeared in nbdkit 1.2.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-captive(1)>,
L<nbdkit-filter(3)>,
L<nbdkit-tls(1)>,
L<nbdkit-plugin(3)>,
L<libnbd(3)>,
L<qemu-nbd(8)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Eric Blake

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2017, 2019 Red Hat Inc.
