=head1 NAME

nbdkit-multi-conn-filter - enable, emulate or disable multi-conn

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbdkit --filter=multi-conn plugin
        [multi-conn-mode=MODE] [multi-conn-track-dirty=LEVEL]
        [multi-conn-exportname=BOOL]
        [plugin-args...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<NBD_FLAG_CAN_MULTI_CONN> ("multi-conn") is an L<NBD protocol|
https://github.com/NetworkBlockDevice/nbd/blob/master/doc/proto.md>
feature that permits multiple clients to connect to the same export
simultaneously, guaranteeing that flush operations are consistent
across connections.  Specifically a sequence of getting a write
response, sending and waiting for a flush response, then sending a
read request will behave the same whether all three commands shared a
single connection or were split among three connections.  When an NBD
client and server are able to negotiate this feature it can provide
significant performance benefits.  Conversely if the feature is not
advertised, clients must presume that separate connections can cache
writes independently (so even after waiting for a flush on one
connection, a read on another connection may see stale data from a
cache).  The NBD standard advises clients not to multiplex commands
across connections if the server does not support multi-conn.

L<nbdkit(1)> plugins must normally opt in to multi-conn, after
carefully ensuring the implementation meets the consistency
requirements.  This filter can emulate flush-consistent semantics
across multiple connections for plugins that do not advertise this
feature.

This filter also has additional modes useful for evaluating
performance and correctness of client and plugin multi-conn behaviors.

This filter assumes that multiple connections to a plugin will
eventually share data, other than any caching effects.  It is not
suitable for use with a plugin that produces completely independent
data per connection from the same export name.  An example of a plugin
that must I<not> be used with this filter is
L<nbdkit-tmpdisk-plugin(1)>.

Additional control over the behavior of client flush commands is
possible by combining this filter with L<nbdkit-fua-filter(1)>.  Note
that L<nbdkit-cache-filter(1)> is also able to provide
multi-connection flush consistency, but at the expense of an extra
layer of caching not needed with this filter.

=head1 PARAMETERS

=over 4

=item B<multi-conn-mode=auto>

This is the default mode.  The behaviour of B<auto> is as follows:

=over 4

=item *

If the selected thread model is C<SERIALIZE_CONNECTIONS>, then this
filter behaves the same as B<disable> mode.

=item *

If the plugin advertises multi-conn, then this filter behaves the same
as B<plugin> mode.

=item *

Otherwise, this filter behaves the same as B<emulate> mode.

=back

In other words, this mode advertises multi-conn to the client exactly
when the plugin supports or can be made to support multiple
simultaneous connections.

=item B<multi-conn-mode=emulate>

When B<emulate> mode is chosen, then this filter tracks all parallel
connections.  When a client issues a flush command over any one
connection (including an implied flush by a write command with the FUA
(force unit access) flag set), the filter then replicates that flush
across each connection to the plugin.  The number of plugin calls made
by the filter can be tuned by adjusting B<multi-conn-track-dirty>.

This mode assumes that flushing each connection is enough to clear any
per-connection cached data, in order to give each connection a
consistent view of the image; therefore, this mode advertises
multi-conn to the client.

Note that in this mode, a client will be unable to connect if the
plugin lacks support for flush, as there would be no way to emulate
cross-connection flush consistency.

=item B<multi-conn-mode=disable>

When B<disable> mode is chosen, this filter disables advertisement of
multi-conn to the client, even if the plugin supports it, and does not
replicate flush commands across connections.  This is useful for
testing whether a client with multiple connections properly sends
multiple flushes in order to overcome per-connection caching.

=item B<multi-conn-mode=plugin>

When B<plugin> mode is chosen, the filter does not change whether
multi-conn is advertised by the plugin, and does not replicate flush
commands across connections; but still honors
B<multi-conn-track-dirty> for minimizing the number of flush commands
passed on to the plugin.

=item B<multi-conn-mode=unsafe>

When B<unsafe> mode is chosen, this filter blindly advertises
multi-conn to the client even if the plugin lacks support.  This is
dangerous, and risks data corruption if the client makes assumptions
about flush consistency that were not actually met.

=item B<multi-conn-track-dirty=fast>

When dirty tracking is set to B<fast>, the filter tracks whether any
connection has caused the image to be dirty (any write, zero, or trim
commands since the last flush, regardless of connection); if all
connections are clean, a client flush command is ignored rather than
sent on to the plugin.  In this mode, a flush action on one connection
marks all other connections as clean, regardless of whether the filter
actually advertised multi-conn, which can result in less activity when
a client sends multiple flushes rather than taking advantage of
multi-conn semantics.  This is safe with B<multi-conn-mode=emulate>,
but potentially unsafe with B<multi-conn-mode=plugin> when the plugin
did not advertise multi-conn, as it does not track whether a read may
have cached stale data prior to a flush.

=item B<multi-conn-track-dirty=connection>

This is the default setting for B<multi-conn-track-dirty>.

The filter tracks whether a given connection is dirty (any write,
zero, or trim commands since the last flush on the given connection,
and any read since the last flush on any other connection); if the
connection is clean, a flush command to that connection (whether
directly from the client, or replicated by B<multi-conn-mode=emulate>
is ignored rather than sent on to the plugin.  This mode may result in
more flush calls than B<multi-conn-track-dirty=fast>, but in turn is
safe to use with B<multi-conn-mode=plugin>.

=item B<multi-conn-track-dirty=off>

When dirty tracking is set to B<off>, all flush commands from the
client are passed on to the plugin, regardless of whether the flush
would be needed for cross-connection consistency.  Note that when
combined with B<multi-conn-mode=emulate>, a client which disregards
multi-conn by flushing on each connection itself results in a
quadratic number of flush operations on the plugin.

=item B<multi-conn-exportname=false>

The exportname switch defaults to false for safety, and causes the
filter to flush across all active connections regardless of the export
name in use by that connection when doing emulation.  However, when a
plugin supports distinct data according to export name, this behavior
will penalize the performance of clients visiting an unrelated export
by spending time on replicated flush operations not actually relevant
to that export.

=item B<multi-conn-exportname=true>

Setting the exportname switch to true causes the filter to only
synchronize flushes to connections visiting the same export name.
This avoids penalizing clients visiting an unrelated export name (such
as L<nbdkit-file-plugin(1)> in B<dir=> mode), but is unsafe when used
with a plugin that serves shared content across all connections
regardless of the export name requested by the client, if that plugin
is not already multi-conn consistent (such as
L<nbdkit-vddk-plugin(1)>).

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

Provide consistent cross-connection flush semantics on top of a plugin
that lacks it natively:

 nbdkit --filter=multi-conn vddk /absolute/path/to/file.vmdk

Minimize the number of expensive flush operations performed when
utilizing a plugin that has multi-conn consistency from a client that
blindly flushes across every connection:

 nbdkit --filter=multi-conn file multi-conn-mode=plugin \
   multi-conn-track-dirty=fast disk.img

=head1 FILES

=over 4

=item F<$filterdir/nbdkit-multi-conn-filter.so>

The filter.

Use C<nbdkit --dump-config> to find the location of C<$filterdir>.

=back

=head1 VERSION

C<nbdkit-multi-conn-filter> first appeared in nbdkit 1.26.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-file-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-vddk-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-filter(3)>,
L<nbdkit-cache-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-fua-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-nocache-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-noextents-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-noparallel-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-nozero-filter(1)>,
L<https://github.com/NetworkBlockDevice/nbd/blob/master/doc/proto.md>

=head1 AUTHORS

Eric Blake

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2018-2021 Red Hat Inc.
