=head1 NAME

nbdkit-error-filter - inject errors for testing clients

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbdkit --filter=error PLUGIN
     [error=EPERM|EIO|ENOMEM|EINVAL|ENOSPC|ESHUTDOWN]
     [error-rate=10%|0.1]
     [error-file=/tmp/inject]
     [error-pread=...] [error-pread-rate=...] [error-pread-file=...]
     [error-pwrite=...] [error-pwrite-rate=...] [error-pwrite-file=...]
     [error-trim=...] [error-trim-rate=...] [error-trim-file=...]
     [error-zero=...] [error-zero-rate=...] [error-zero-file=...]
     [error-extents=...] [error-extents-rate=...] [error-extents-file=...]
     [error-cache=...] [error-cache-rate=...] [error-cache-file=...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<nbdkit-error-filter> is an nbdkit filter that injects random errors
into replies from the server.  This is used for testing that NBD
clients can handle errors.

All parameters are optional, but you should usually specify one of the
C<error-rate> or C<error-*-rate> parameters,
B<otherwise this filter will do nothing>.

=head1 EXAMPLES

Inject a low rate of errors randomly into the connection:

 nbdkit --filter=error file disk.img error-rate=1%

Reading, trimming, cache and extents (block status) requests will be
successful, but all writes and zeroing will return "No space left on
device":

 nbdkit --filter=error file disk.img \
                            error=ENOSPC \
                            error-pwrite-rate=100% \
                            error-zero-rate=100%

To make all connections fail hard 60 seconds after the server is
started, use:

 rm -f /tmp/inject
 nbdkit --filter=error file disk.img \
                            error-rate=100% \
                            error-file=/tmp/inject
 sleep 60; touch /tmp/inject

=head1 PARAMETERS

=over 4

=item B<error=EPERM|EIO|ENOMEM|EINVAL|ENOSPC|ESHUTDOWN>

When a random error is injected, you can select which one from the
range of possible NBD errors (the NBD protocol only supports a limited
range of error codes).

This parameter is optional and the default is C<EIO>
("Input/output error").

=item B<error-rate=>NB<%>

=item B<error-rate=>0..1

The rate of injected errors per NBD request.  This can be expressed as
either a percentage between C<0%> and C<100%> or as a probability
between C<0> and C<1>.  If C<0%> or C<0> is used then no errors are
ever injected, and if C<100%> or C<1> is used then all requests return
errors.

This parameter is optional and the default is C<0%>.
B<Unless you set this, the filter will do nothing.>

=item B<error-file=>FILENAME

Errors will only be injected when F<FILENAME> exists.  (Note you must
also specify the C<error-rate>).

You can use this for fine-grained control over when to inject errors,
for example if you want to trigger an error at an exact moment during
a test, arrange for this file to be created at the appropriate time.
Or conversely to test error recovery in a client, create the file
initially, and then delete it to check the client can recover.

This parameter is optional.

=item B<error-pread>, B<error-pread-rate>, B<error-pread-file>.

Same as C<error>, C<error-rate> and C<error-file> but only apply the
settings to NBD pread requests.

=item B<error-pwrite>, B<error-pwrite-rate>, B<error-pwrite-file>.

Same as C<error>, C<error-rate> and C<error-file> but only apply the
settings to NBD pwrite requests.

=item B<error-trim>, B<error-trim-rate>, B<error-trim-file>.

Same as C<error>, C<error-rate> and C<error-file> but only apply the
settings to NBD trim requests.

=item B<error-zero>, B<error-zero-rate>, B<error-zero-file>.

Same as C<error>, C<error-rate> and C<error-file> but only apply the
settings to NBD zero requests.

=item B<error-extents>, B<error-extents-rate>, B<error-extents-file>.

(nbdkit E<ge> 1.12)

Same as C<error>, C<error-rate> and C<error-file> but only apply the
settings to NBD block status requests to read extents.

=item B<error-cache>, B<error-cache-rate>, B<error-cache-file>.

(nbdkit E<ge> 1.14)

Same as C<error>, C<error-rate> and C<error-file> but only apply the
settings to NBD cache requests.

=back

=head1 NOTES

=head2 Peculiar debug output

If you are looking at the debugging output (using C<nbdkit -f -v>)
then you may see peculiar "errors" appearing when using this filter,
for example:

 nbdkit: file.9: debug: error: pread count=1024 offset=0 flags=0x0

In fact these are not errors, nbdkit core is simply printing the name
of the filter which happens to be C<"error">.  When this filter
injects an error you will see something like:

 nbdkit: file.4: error: injecting ENOSPC error into pwrite

=head1 FILES

=over 4

=item F<$filterdir/nbdkit-error-filter.so>

The filter.

Use C<nbdkit --dump-config> to find the location of C<$filterdir>.

=back

=head1 VERSION

C<nbdkit-error-filter> first appeared in nbdkit 1.6.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-file-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-full-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-retry-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-retry-request-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-filter(3)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2018 Red Hat Inc.
