=head1 NAME

nbdkit-readahead-filter - prefetch data ahead of sequential reads

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbdkit --filter=readahead PLUGIN

=for paragraph

 nbdkit --filter=readahead --filter=cache PLUGIN

=for paragraph

 nbdkit --filter=readahead --filter=cow PLUGIN cow-on-cache=true

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<nbdkit-readahead-filter> is a filter that prefetches data when the
client is reading.

When the client issues a read, this filter issues a parallel prefetch
(C<.cache>) for subsequent data.  Plugins which support this command
will prefetch the data, making sequential reads faster.  For plugins
which do not support this command, you can inject
L<nbdkit-cache-filter(1)> below (after) this filter, giving
approximately the same effect.  L<nbdkit-cow-filter(1)> can be used
instead of nbdkit-cache-filter, if you add the C<cow-on-cache=true>
option.

The filter uses a simple adaptive algorithm which accelerates
sequential reads and requires no further configuration.

A similar filter is L<nbdkit-scan-filter(1)> which reads ahead over
the whole disk, useful if you know that the client will be reading
sequentially across most or all of the disk.

=head2 Limitations

In a number of significant cases this filter will do nothing.  The
filter will print a warning message if this happens.

=over 4

=item Thread model must be parallel

For example L<nbdkit-curl-plugin(1)> only supports
C<serialize_requests>, and so this filter cannot perform prefetches in
parallel with the read requests.

We may be able to lift this restriction in future.

=item Underlying filters or plugin must support C<.cache> (prefetch)

Very many plugins do not have the concept of prefetching and/or
do not implement the C<.cache> callback, and so there is no
way for this filter to issue prefetches.

You can usually get around this by adding I<--filter=cache> after this
filter as explained above.  It may be necessary to limit the total
size of the cache (see L<nbdkit-cache-filter(1)/CACHE MAXIMUM SIZE>).

=item Clients and kernels may do readahead already

It may be the case that NBD clients are already issuing
C<NBD_CMD_CACHE> (NBD prefetch) commands.  It may also be the case
that your plugin is using local file functions where the kernel is
doing readahead.  In such cases this filter is not necessary and may
be pessimal.

=back

=head1 PARAMETERS

There are no parameters specific to nbdkit-readahead-filter.  Any
parameters are passed through to and processed by the underlying
plugin in the normal way.

=head1 FILES

=over 4

=item F<$filterdir/nbdkit-readahead-filter.so>

The filter.

Use C<nbdkit --dump-config> to find the location of C<$filterdir>.

=back

=head1 VERSION

C<nbdkit-readahead-filter> first appeared in nbdkit 1.12.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-cache-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-cow-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-file-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-retry-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-scan-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-torrent-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-vddk-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-filter(3)>,
L<qemu-img(1)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright Red Hat
