=head1 NAME

nbdkit-golang-plugin - writing nbdkit plugins in Go

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbdkit /path/to/plugin.so [arguments...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This manual page describes how to write nbdkit plugins in compiled
Golang code.  Go plugins are compiled to F<*.so> files (the same as
plugins written in C) and are used in the same way.

=head1 WRITING A GOLANG NBDKIT PLUGIN

For examples of plugins written in Go, see:
L<https://gitlab.com/nbdkit/nbdkit/blob/master/plugins/golang/examples>

The F<minimal/minimal.go> example is the smallest possible plugin,
implementing only the required callbacks (C<Open>, C<GetSize> and
C<PRead>).  Other examples show other nbdkit features.

Broadly speaking, Golang nbdkit plugins work like C ones, so you
should read L<nbdkit-plugin(3)> first.

To write a Golang nbdkit plugin, you must:

=over 4

=item *

Set the package to C<main>

Plugins should be main packages, because that's how Golang shared
libraries work.

=item *

Import C<"C">, C<"unsafe"> and C<"libguestfs.org/nbdkit">

=item *

Create plugin and connection structs

Conventionally these are named after the plugin, but you can call them
whatever you want.  They must derive from the C<nbdkit.Plugin> and
C<nbdkit.Connection> structs respectively:

 type MyPlugin struct {
         nbdkit.Plugin
 }

 type MyConnection struct {
         nbdkit.Connection
 }

The plugin struct is used to define the global callbacks, like
C<Load>, C<Config> and C<GetReady>.  The connection struct represents
a client connection and is used to define connection callbacks like
C<GetSize> and C<PRead>.  What connects the two is the C<Open>
callback which is called when the client has connected and where you
should return a new instance of your connection struct.  For example:

 func (p *MyPlugin) Load() {
         // global callback used for initializing the plugin
 }

 func (p *MyPlugin) Open(readonly bool) (nbdkit.ConnectionInterface, error) {
         // new client has connected
         return &MyConnection{}, nil
 }

 func (c *MyConnection) GetSize() (uint64, error) {
         // called per-client
         return virtual_size, nil
 }

You can store per-client data in the connection struct.  Global data
could be stored as global variables or kept in the plugin struct as
you wish.

=item *

Include the C<plugin_init> and C<main> boilerplate

See the example plugins for the correct boilerplate to include.

=item *

Compile the plugin to a shared library

 go build -o nbdkit-mygolang-plugin.so -buildmode=c-shared

This builds the shared object (F<*.so>) which is the plugin, and also
a header file (F<*.h>) which is irrelevant and you can delete.

=back

=head2 C<Can*> callbacks

B<Important:> If you implement C<PWrite> it will I<not> be called
unless you also implement a C<CanWrite> callback that returns true.
(This is different from plugins written in C or other languages).

The same applies to C<Flush> (C<CanFlush>), C<Trim> (C<CanTrim>) and
C<Zero> (C<CanZero>).

 func (c *MyConnection) CanWrite() (bool, error) {
         return true, nil
 }

 func (c *MyConnection) PWrite(buf []byte, offset uint64,
        flags uint32) error {
         // ...
}

=head2 Missing callbacks

The following callbacks are not yet implemented:

=over 4

=item C<version>

=item C<longname>

=item C<description>

=item C<magic_config_key>

=item C<config_help>

=item C<thread_model>

At the moment the thread model is always
C<NBDKIT_THREAD_MODEL_PARALLEL>.

=item C<can_fast_zero>

=item C<can_extents>

=item C<can_fua>

=item C<can_cache>

=item C<extents>

=item C<cache>

=back

=head1 VERSION

Golang plugins first appeared in nbdkit 1.20.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-plugin(3)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2020 Red Hat Inc.
