=head1 NAME

nbdkit-tmpdisk-plugin - create a fresh temporary filesystem for each client

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbdkit tmpdisk [size=]SIZE [type=ext4|xfs|vfat|...] [label=LABEL]

 nbdkit tmpdisk [size=]SIZE command=COMMAND [VAR=VALUE ...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This L<nbdkit(1)> plugin is used for creating temporary filesystems
for thin clients.  Each time a client connects it will see a fresh,
empty filesystem for its exclusive use.  B<The filesystem is deleted>
when the client disconnects.

When a new client connects, a blank, sparse file of the required size
is created in C<$TMPDIR> (or F</var/tmp>).  L<mkfs(8)> is then run on
the file to create the empty filesystem, and this filesystem is served
to the client.  Unlike L<nbdkit-linuxdisk-plugin(1)> each client of
this plugin sees a different disk.

The size of the disk is chosen using the C<size> parameter.  The
filesystem type is C<ext4> but this can be changed using the C<type>
parameter (controlling the I<-t> option of mkfs).  The filesystem
label may be set using C<label>.

=head2 The command parameter

Instead of running mkfs you can run an arbitrary command (a shell
script fragment) to create the disk.

The other parameters to the plugin are turned into shell variables
passed to the command.  For example C<type> becomes the shell variable
C<$type>, etc.  Any parameters you want can be passed to the plugin
and will be turned into shell variables (not only C<type> and
C<label>) making this a very flexible method to create temporary disks
of all kinds.

Two special variables are also passed to the shell script fragment:

=over 4

=item C<$disk>

The absolute path of the disk file.  Note that this is not
pre-created, you must create it yourself, for example using:

 truncate -s $size "$disk"

C<$disk> is deleted automatically when the client disconnects.

=item C<$size>

The virtual size in bytes.  This is the C<size> parameter, converted
to bytes.  Note the final size served to the client is whatever disk
size C<command> creates.

=back

=head2 Security considerations

Because each client gets a new disk, the amount of disk space
required on the server can be as much as
S<<< I<number of clients> × I<size> >>>.  It is therefore best to
limit the number of clients using L<nbdkit-limit-filter(1)> or take
steps to limit where clients can connect from using
L<nbdkit-ip-filter(1)>, firewalls, or TLS client certificates.

=head1 EXAMPLES

=head2 Remote tmpfs

One use for this is to create a kind of "remote L<tmpfs(5)>" for thin
clients.  On the server you would run (see L<nbdkit-service(1)>):

 nbdkit tmpdisk 16G

To set up each thin client follow the instructions in
L<nbdkit-client(1)>.  Clients will see a fresh, empty, mounted
directory after boot.

=head2 Overriding mkfs options

Using C<command> allows you to easily override any mkfs option, for
example:

 nbdkit tmpdisk 16G command='
     truncate -s $size "$disk"
     mke2fs -F -N 10000 -t ext4 "$disk"
 '

=head2 Serve a fresh blank disk to each client

Again using C<command>, this demonstrates serving any file that you
can create locally to the client.  This is different from
L<nbdkit-memory-plugin(1)> because the clients all see their own
private disk (instead of all seeing the same shared disk):

 nbdkit tmpdisk 16G command=' truncate -s $size "$disk" '

=head2 Serve a fresh operating system to each client

 nbdkit tmpdisk 16G os=fedora-31 \
     command=' virt-builder -o "$disk" --size ${size}b "$os" '

=head2 Serve a throwaway snapshot of a base image to each client

You could create a base image using L<mke2fs(8)> I<-d> option,
L<virt-builder(1)>, or similar tools.  Then in the command you could
copy and serve different throwaway snapshots to each client:

 truncate -s 1G base.img
 mke2fs -d initial-content/ -F -t ext4 base.img
 nbdkit tmpdisk size=0 base=$PWD/base.img \
     command=' cp --sparse=always "$base" "$disk" '

The unusual C<size=0> parameter is because when using C<command>,
C<size> is only a request (but the parameter is required).  In this
case the command ignores the requested size.  The final size is the
size of C<$disk> created by the L<cp(1)> command.

=head1 PARAMETERS

=over 4

=item B<command='>COMMANDB<'>

Instead of running L<mkfs(8)> to create the initial filesystem, run
C<COMMAND> (a shell script fragment which usually must be quoted to
protect it from the shell).  See L</The command parameter> and
L</EXAMPLES> sections above.

=item B<label=>LABEL

Select the filesystem label.  The default is not set.

=item [B<size=>]SIZE

Specify the virtual size of the disk image.

If using C<command>, this is only a suggested size.  The actual size
of the resulting disk will be the size of the disk created by
C<command>.

This parameter is required.

C<size=> is a magic config key and may be omitted in most cases.
See L<nbdkit(1)/Magic parameters>.

=item B<type=>FS

Select the filesystem type.  The default is C<ext4>.  Most
non-networked, non-cluster filesystem types supported by the
L<mkfs(8)> command can be used here.

=back

=head1 ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

=over 4

=item C<TMPDIR>

The temporary disks for this plugin are created in this directory, one
per connected client.  If not set this defaults to F</var/tmp>.

=back

=head1 FILES

=over 4

=item F<$plugindir/nbdkit-tmpdisk-plugin.so>

The plugin.

Use C<nbdkit --dump-config> to find the location of C<$plugindir>.

=back

=head1 VERSION

C<nbdkit-tmpdisk-plugin> first appeared in nbdkit 1.20.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-plugin(3)>,
L<nbdkit-data-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-eval-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-file-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-ip-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-limit-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-linuxdisk-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-memory-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-sh-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-loop(1)>,
L<nbdkit-tls(1)>,
L<mkfs(8)>,
L<mke2fs(8)>,
L<virt-builder(1)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2018-2020 Red Hat Inc.
