=head1 NAME

nbdkit-nocache-filter - nbdkit nocache filter

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbdkit --filter=nocache plugin [cachemode=MODE] [plugin-args...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<nbdkit-nocache-filter> is a filter that intentionally disables
efficient handling of advisory client cache requests across the NBD
protocol.  It is mainly useful for evaluating timing differences to
determine the impact of caching requests.

Note that the effects of this filter (in crippling handling of client
cache requests) is somewhat orthogonal from that of the
L<nbdkit-cache-filter(1)> (adding local caching of client read/write
requests); the two filters can be run together to experiment with
timings.

=head1 PARAMETERS

=over 4

=item B<cachemode=none>

=item B<cachemode=emulate>

=item B<cachemode=nop>

Optional, controls which mode the filter will use.  Mode B<none>
(default) means that cache support is not advertised to the
client. Mode B<emulate> means that cache support is emulated by the
filter using the plugin's C<pread> callback, regardless of whether the
plugin itself implemented the C<cache> callback. Mode B<nop> means
that cache requests are always accepted and immediately ignored,
rather than having any actual impact.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

Serve the file F<disk.img>, but prevent C<NBD_CMD_CACHE> requests
altogether, to get a baseline timing of behavior when the client is
unable to make cache requests:

 nbdkit --filter=nocache file disk.img

Serve the file F<disk.img>, but with cache requests silently ignored,
rather than being forwarded on to the file plugin (which attempts to
use L<posix_fadvise(3)>), to compare against the timings without the
filter and determine whether the file plugin caching was worthwhile:

 nbdkit --filter=nocache file disk.img cachemode=nop

=head1 FILES

=over 4

=item F<$filterdir/nbdkit-nocache-filter.so>

The filter.

Use C<nbdkit --dump-config> to find the location of C<$filterdir>.

=back

=head1 VERSION

C<nbdkit-nocache-filter> first appeared in nbdkit 1.14.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-file-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-filter(3)>,
L<nbdkit-cache-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-fua-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-multi-conn-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-noextents-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-noparallel-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-nozero-filter(1)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Eric Blake

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright Red Hat
