=head1 NAME

nbdkit-tar-filter - read and write files inside tar files without unpacking

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbdkit file FILENAME.tar --filter=tar tar-entry=PATH_INSIDE_TAR

=head1 EXAMPLES

=head2 Serve a single file inside a tarball

 nbdkit file file.tar --filter=tar tar-entry=some/disk.img
 guestfish --format=raw -a nbd://localhost

=head2 Opening a disk image inside an OVA file

The popular "Open Virtual Appliance" (OVA) format is really an
uncompressed tar file containing (usually) VMDK-format files, so you
could access one file in an OVA like this:

 $ tar tf rhel.ova
 rhel.ovf
 rhel-disk1.vmdk
 rhel.mf
 $ nbdkit -r file rhel.ova --filter=tar tar-entry=rhel-disk1.vmdk
 $ guestfish --ro --format=vmdk -a nbd://localhost

In this case the tarball is opened readonly (I<-r> option).  The
plugin supports write access, but writing to the VMDK file in the
tarball does not change data checksums stored in other files (the
C<rhel.mf> file in this example), and as these will become incorrect
you probably won't be able to open the file with another tool
afterwards.

=head2 Open a disk image inside a remote tar file

You can use other plugins apart from L<nbdkit-file-plugin(1)> to
provide the tar file.  For example if the tar file is located on a web
server use:

 nbdkit -r curl https://example.com/file.tar \
        --filter=tar tar-entry=disk.img

=head2 Open a compressed tar file (read-only)

This filter cannot handle compressed tar files itself, but you can
combine it with L<nbdkit-gzip-filter(1)> or L<nbdkit-xz-filter(1)>:

 nbdkit file filename.tar.gz \
        --filter=tar tar-entry=disk.img --filter=gzip
 nbdkit file filename.tar.xz \
        --filter=tar tar-entry=disk.img --filter=xz

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<nbdkit-tar-filter> is a filter which can read and writes files
inside an uncompressed tar file without unpacking the tar file.

The tar file is provided by the underlying plugin.  You must tell the
filter which entry in the tar file you wish to read and write using
the C<tar-entry> parameter.  C<tar-entry> must exactly match the file
name in the tar index.  Use C<tar tf filename.tar> to list the index
of a tar file.

This filter will B<not> work directly on compressed tar files.  You
have to combine it with another filter as shown in the example above.

Use the nbdkit I<-r> flag to open the file readonly.  This is the
safest option because it guarantees that the tar file will not be
modified.  Without I<-r> writes will modify the tar file.

The disk image cannot be resized.

=head1 PARAMETERS

=over 4

=item [B<tar-entry=>]PATH_INSIDE_TAR

The path of the file inside the tarball to serve.  This parameter is
required.  It must exactly match the name stored in the tarball, so
use S<C<tar tf filename.tar>>

=item B<tar=gtar>

=item B<tar=>/PATH/TO/GTAR

Specify the program name or full path of GNU tar, in case C<tar> on
C<$PATH> is not GNU tar.  This filter requires GNU tar and will not
normally work with other tar programs (eg. on FreeBSD).

=back

=head1 FILES

=over 4

=item F<$filterdir/nbdkit-tar-filter.so>

The plugin.

Use C<nbdkit --dump-config> to find the location of C<$filterdir>.

=back

=head1 VERSION

C<nbdkit-tar-filter> first appeared in nbdkit 1.22.  It is derived
from C<nbdkit-tar-plugin> which first appeared in nbdkit 1.2.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-curl-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-file-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-gzip-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-offset-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-plugin(3)>,
L<nbdkit-ssh-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-xz-filter(1)>,
L<tar(1)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones.

Based on the virt-v2v OVA importer written by Tomáš Golembiovský.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2017-2020 Red Hat Inc.
