=head1 NAME

nbdkit-extentlist-filter - place extent list over a plugin

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbdkit -r --filter=extentlist plugin extentlist=FILENAME

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<nbdkit-extentlist-filter> is an nbdkit filter that lets you place a
static list of extents on top of an existing plugin.  Extents record
whether or not specific parts of the disk are allocated or sparse.

You can use this with plugins which cannot get extent information
themselves, but where you can get this information from another
source.  One place where it is useful is with L<nbdkit-ssh-plugin(1)>
because the sftp protocol does not support reading sparseness
information, but you may be able to get this information directly from
the source disk on the remote server using commands such as
L<xfs_bmap(8)>.  A similar situation applies to
L<nbdkit-curl-plugin(1)>.

Note that the extent list is read-only.  This filter does not monitor
writes and trims in order to update the extent list.  What can happen
is that you would write to a “hole” in the disk, but would not be able
to read it back because the NBD client would still think that part of
the disk is a hole.  So it is generally only safe to use this filter
in read-only mode (I<-r> option).

=head1 FILE FORMAT

The list of extents is specified in a text file.  There is one extent
specified per line.  Each line has the format:

 offset length type

The C<offset> and C<length> fields may use any format understood by
C<nbdkit_parse_size>.  The optional C<type> field may be an integer,
missing (same as 0), or a comma-separated list of the words C<hole>
and C<zero>.  (The fields correspond to the inputs of the
C<nbdkit_add_extent> function, see L<nbdkit-plugin(3)>).

An example of a valid set of extents covering a C<10M> disk where the
first megabyte only is allocated data:

 0  1M
 1M 9M  hole,zero

Or you could omit the C<hole,zero> extent since any gaps are assumed
to be holes with that type:

 0  1M

The extent list need not cover the whole disk, and does not need to be
in ascending order, but it must I<not> contain overlapping extents.

=head1 PARAMETERS

=over 4

=item B<extentlist=>FILENAME

Specify the file containing the extent list, in the format described
in L</FILE FORMAT> above.

=back

=head1 FILES

=over 4

=item F<$filterdir/nbdkit-extentlist-filter.so>

The filter.

Use C<nbdkit --dump-config> to find the location of C<$filterdir>.

=back

=head1 VERSION

C<nbdkit-extentlist-filter> first appeared in nbdkit 1.18.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-cacheextents-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-noextents-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-filter(3)>,
L<nbdkit-plugin(3)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2020 Red Hat Inc.
