=head1 NAME

nbdkit-curl-plugin - nbdkit curl plugin (HTTP, FTP and other protocols)

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbdkit -r curl [url=]http://example.com/disk.img

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<nbdkit-curl-plugin> is a plugin for L<nbdkit(1)> which turns content
served over HTTP, FTP, and more, into a Network Block Device.  It uses
a library called libcurl (also known as cURL) to read data from URLs.
The exact list of protocols that libcurl can handle depends on how it
was compiled, but most versions will handle HTTP, HTTPS, FTP, FTPS and
more (see: S<C<curl -V>>).

B<Note:> This plugin supports writes.  However for HTTP, you may not
want nbdkit to issue PUT requests to the remote server (which probably
doesn't understand them).  To force nbdkit to use a readonly
connection, pass the I<-r> flag.

Although this plugin can access SFTP (ie. SSH) servers, it is much
better to use L<nbdkit-ssh-plugin(1)>.  This plugin can be used to
access C<file:///> URLs, but you should use L<nbdkit-file-plugin(1)>
instead.

=head1 EXAMPLE

 nbdkit -r curl http://example.com/disk.img

serves the remote disk image as NBD on TCP port 10809 (to control
ports and protocols used to serve NBD see L<nbdkit(1)>).

=head1 PARAMETERS

=over 4

=item B<cainfo=>FILENAME

(nbdkit E<ge> 1.18)

Configure CA bundle for libcurl. See L<CURLOPT_CAINFO(3)> for details.

Pass empty string in order to not use the default certificate store
that libcurl is compiled with.

=item B<capath=>PATH

(nbdkit E<ge> 1.18)

Set CA certificates directory location for libcurl. See
L<CURLOPT_CAPATH(3)> for more information.

=item B<cookie=>COOKIE

=item B<cookie=+>FILENAME

=item B<cookie=->

=item B<cookie=->FD

(nbdkit E<ge> 1.12)

Set a cookie in the request header when connecting to the remote
server.

A typical example is:

 cookie='vmware_soap_session="52a01262-bf93-ccce-d379-8dabb3e55560"'

This option can be used at most once.  It only works for HTTP and
HTTPS transports.  To set multiple cookies you must concatenate them
yourself, eg:

 cookie='name1=content1; name2=content2'

See L<CURLOPT_COOKIE(3)> for more information about this.  The format
is quite strict and must consist of C<key=value>, each cookie
separated by exactly S<C<"; ">> (semicolon and space).

If the cookie is used for authentication then passing it on the
command line is not secure on shared machines.  Use the alternate
C<+FILENAME> syntax to pass it in a file, C<-> to read the cookie
interactively, or C<-FD> to read it from a file descriptor.

=item B<cookiefile=>

(nbdkit E<ge> 1.26)

Enable cookie processing (eg. when following redirects), starting with
an empty list of cookies.  This is equivalent to calling
L<CURLOPT_COOKIEFILE(3)> with an empty string.

=item B<cookiefile=>FILENAME

(nbdkit E<ge> 1.26)

Enable cookie processing (eg. when following redirects), prepopulating
cookies from the given file.  The file can contain cookies in any
format supported by curl, see L<CURLOPT_COOKIEFILE(3)>.  Cookies sent
by the server are not saved when nbdkit exits.

=item B<cookiejar=>FILENAME

(nbdkit E<ge> 1.26)

Enable cookie processing (eg. when following redirects), prepopulating
cookies from the given file, and writing server cookies back to the
file when the NBD handle is closed.  The file can contain cookies in
any format supported by curl, see L<CURLOPT_COOKIEJAR(3)>.

There is some advice on the internet telling you to set this to
F</dev/null>, but you B<should not> do this because it can corrupt
F</dev/null>.  If you don't want a cookiejar, omit this option.  If
you want to enable cookie processing without updating a permanent
cookiejar, use the C<cookiefile=> option instead.

=item B<cookie-script=>SCRIPT

=item B<cookie-script-renew=>SECS

(nbdkit E<ge> 1.22, not Windows)

Run C<SCRIPT> (a command or shell script fragment) to generate the
HTTP/HTTPS cookies.  C<cookie-script> cannot be used with C<cookie>.
See L</HEADER AND COOKIE SCRIPTS> below.

=item B<followlocation=false>

(nbdkit E<ge> 1.26)

Follow redirects from the server.  The default is true (to follow
redirects), but you can set this to false to prevent this.

=item B<header=>HEADER

(nbdkit E<ge> 1.22)

For HTTP/HTTPS, send a custom header, or remove a header that curl has
added.  To add a custom header:

 header='X-My-Name: John Doe'

To remove a header that curl has added, add the header followed by a
colon and no value:

 header='User-Agent:'

To add a custom header that has no value, you have to use a semicolon
instead of colon.  This adds an C<X-Empty:> header with no value:

 header='X-Empty;'

See L<CURLOPT_HTTPHEADER(3)>.  You can use this option multiple times
in order to add several headers.  Note this sends the header in all
requests, even when following a redirect, which can cause headers
(eg. containing sensitive authorization information) to be sent to
hosts other than the one originally requested.

=item B<header-script=>SCRIPT

=item B<header-script-renew=>SECS

(nbdkit E<ge> 1.22, not Windows)

Run C<SCRIPT> (a command or shell script fragment) to generate the
HTTP/HTTPS headers.  C<header-script> cannot be used with C<header>.
See L</HEADER AND COOKIE SCRIPTS> below.

=item B<password=>PASSWORD

Set the password to use when connecting to the remote server.

Note that passing this on the command line is not secure on shared
machines.

=item B<password=->

Ask for the password (interactively) when nbdkit starts up.

=item B<password=+>FILENAME

Read the password from the named file.  This is a secure method
to supply a password, as long as you set the permissions on the file
appropriately.

=item B<password=->FD

Read the password from file descriptor number C<FD>, inherited from
the parent process when nbdkit starts up.  This is also a secure
method to supply a password.

=item B<protocols=>PROTO,PROTO,...

(nbdkit E<ge> 1.12)

Limit the protocols that are allowed in the URL.  Use this option for
extra security if the URL comes from an untrusted source and you want
to avoid security isues in the more obscure protocols that curl
supports.  (See qemu CVE-2013-0249 for an example of a security bug
introduced by allowing unrestricted protocols).

For example if you only intend HTTP and HTTPS URLs to be used, then
add this parameter: C<protocols=http,https>

This restriction also applies if the plugin follows a redirect to
another protocol (eg. you start with an C<https://> URL which the
server redirects to C<ftp://>).  To prevent redirects altogether see
the C<followlocation> parameter.

The value of this parameter is a comma-separated list of protocols.
The following protocols are known: B<dict>, B<file>, B<ftp>, B<ftps>,
B<gopher>, B<http>, B<https>, B<imap>, B<imaps>, B<ldap>, B<ldaps>,
B<mqtt>, B<pop3>, B<pop3s>, B<rtmp>, B<rtmpe>, B<rtmps>, B<rtmpt>,
B<rtmpte>, B<rtmpts>, B<rtsp>, B<scp>, B<sftp>, B<smb>, B<smbs>,
B<smtp>, B<smtps>, B<telnet>, B<tftp>.

The default is to allow any protocol.

=item B<proxy=>PROXY

(nbdkit E<ge> 1.20)

Set the proxy.  See L<CURLOPT_PROXY(3)>.

=item B<proxy-password=>PASSWORD

=item B<proxy-password=->

=item B<proxy-password=+>FILENAME

=item B<proxy-password=->FD

=item B<proxy-user=>USERNAME

(nbdkit E<ge> 1.12)

Set the proxy username and password.

=item B<sslverify=false>

Don't verify the SSL certificate of the remote host.

=item B<tcp-keepalive=true>

(nbdkit E<ge> 1.20)

Enable TCP keepalives.

=item B<tcp-nodelay=false>

(nbdkit E<ge> 1.20)

Disable Nagle’s algorithm.

=item B<timeout=>SECS

Set the timeout for requests.

=item B<timeout=0>

Use the default libcurl timeout for requests.

=item B<unix-socket-path=>PATH

(nbdkit E<ge> 1.10)

Instead of using a TCP connection, connect to the server over the
named Unix domain socket.  See L<CURLOPT_UNIX_SOCKET_PATH(3)>.

=item [B<url=>]URL

The URL of the remote disk image.  This is passed to libcurl directly
via L<CURLOPT_URL(3)>.

This parameter is required.

C<url=> is a magic config key and may be omitted in most cases.
See L<nbdkit(1)/Magic parameters>.

=item B<user=>USERNAME

Set the username to use when connecting to the remote server.  This
may also be set in the URL (eg. C<http://foo@example.com/disk.img>)

=item B<user-agent=>USER-AGENT

(nbdkit E<ge> 1.22)

Send user-agent header when using HTTP or HTTPS.  The default is no
user-agent header.

=back

=head1 HEADER AND COOKIE SCRIPTS

While the C<header> and C<cookie> parameters can be used to specify
static headers and cookies which are used in every HTTP/HTTPS request,
the alternate C<header-script> and C<cookie-script> parameters can be
used to run an external script or program to generate headers and/or
cookies.  This is particularly useful to access services which require
an authorization token.  In addition the C<header-script-renew> and
C<cookie-script-renew> parameters allow you to renew the authorization
token by rerunning the script periodically.

C<header-script> is incompatible with C<header>, and C<cookie-script>
is incompatible with C<cookie>.

=head2 Header script

The header script should print zero or more HTTP headers, each line of
output in the same format as the C<header> parameter.  The headers
printed by the script are passed to L<CURLOPT_HTTPHEADER(3)>.

In the following example, an imaginary web service requires
authentication using a token fetched from a separate login server.
The token expires after 60 seconds, so we also tell the plugin that it
must renew the token (by re-running the script) if more than 50
seconds have elapsed since the last request:

 nbdkit curl https://service.example.com/disk.img \
        header-script='
          printf "Authorization: Bearer "
          curl -s -X POST https://auth.example.com/login |
               jq -r .token
        ' \
        header-script-renew=50

=head2 Cookie script

The cookie script should print a single line in the same format as the
C<cookie> parameter.  This is passed to L<CURLOPT_COOKIE(3)>.

=head2 Header and cookie script shell variables

Within the C<header-script> and C<cookie-script> the following shell
variables are available:

=over 4

=item C<$iteration>

The number of times that the script has been called.  The first time
the script is called this contains C<0>.

=item C<$url>

The URL as passed to the plugin.

=back

=head2 Example: VMware ESXi cookies

VMware ESXi’s web server can expose both VMDK and raw format disk
images, but requires you to log in using HTTP Basic Authentication.
While you can use the C<user> and C<password> parameters to send HTTP
Basic Authentication headers in every request, tests have shown that
it is faster to accept the cookie which the server returns and send
that instead.  (It is not clear why it is faster, but one theory is
that VMware has to do a more expensive username and password check
each time.)

The web server can be accessed as below.  Since the cookie expires
after a certain period of time, we use C<cookie-script-renew>, and
because the server uses a self-signed certificate we must use
I<--insecure> and C<sslverify=false>.

 SERVER=esx.example.com
 DCPATH=data
 DS=datastore1
 GUEST=guest-name
 URL="https://$SERVER/folder/$GUEST/$GUEST-flat.vmdk?dcPath=$DCPATH&dsName=$DS"
 
 nbdkit curl "$URL" \
        cookie-script='
            curl --head -s --insecure -u root:password "$url" |
                 sed -ne "{ s/^Set-Cookie: \([^;]*\);.*/\1/ip }"
        ' \
        cookie-script-renew=500 \
        sslverify=false

=head2 Example: Docker Hub authorization tokens

Accessing objects like container layers from Docker Hub requires that
you first fetch an authorization token, even for anonymous access.
These tokens expire after about 5 minutes (300 seconds) so must be
periodically renewed.

You will need this authorization script (F</tmp/auth.sh>):

 #!/bin/sh -
 IMAGE=library/fedora
 curl -s "https://auth.docker.io/token?service=registry.docker.io&scope=repository:$IMAGE:pull" |
      jq -r .token

You will also need this script to get the blobSum of the layer
(F</tmp/blobsum.sh>):

 #!/bin/sh -
 TOKEN=`/tmp/auth.sh`
 IMAGE=library/fedora
 curl -s -X GET -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
      "https://registry-1.docker.io/v2/$IMAGE/manifests/latest" |
      jq -r '.fsLayers[0].blobSum'

Both scripts must be executable, and both can be run on their own to
check they are working.  To run nbdkit:

 IMAGE=library/fedora
 BLOBSUM=`/tmp/blobsum.sh`
 URL="https://registry-1.docker.io/v2/$IMAGE/blobs/$BLOBSUM"
 
 nbdkit curl "$URL" \
        header-script=' printf "Authorization: Bearer "; /tmp/auth.sh ' \
        header-script-renew=200 \
        --filter=gzip

Note that this exposes a tar file over NBD.  See also
L<nbdkit-tar-filter(1)>.

=head1 DEBUG FLAGS

=over 4

=item B<-D curl.scripts=1>

This prints out the headers and cookies generated by the
C<header-script> and C<cookie-script> options, which can be useful
when debugging these scripts.

=item B<-D curl.verbose=1>

This enables very verbose curl debugging.  See L<CURLOPT_VERBOSE(3)>.
This is mainly useful if you suspect there is a bug inside libcurl
itself.

=back

=head1 FILES

=over 4

=item F<$plugindir/nbdkit-curl-plugin.so>

The plugin.

Use C<nbdkit --dump-config> to find the location of C<$plugindir>.

=back

=head1 VERSION

C<nbdkit-curl-plugin> first appeared in nbdkit 1.2.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<curl(1)>,
L<libcurl(3)>,
L<CURLOPT_CAINFO(3)>,
L<CURLOPT_CAPATH(3)>,
L<CURLOPT_COOKIE(3)>,
L<CURLOPT_COOKIEFILE(3)>,
L<CURLOPT_COOKIEJAR(3)>,
L<CURLOPT_FOLLOWLOCATION(3)>,
L<CURLOPT_HTTPHEADER(3)>,
L<CURLOPT_PROXY(3)>,
L<CURLOPT_TCP_KEEPALIVE(3)>,
L<CURLOPT_TCP_NODELAY(3)>,
L<CURLOPT_URL(3)>,
L<CURLOPT_UNIX_SOCKET_PATH(3)>,
L<CURLOPT_USERAGENT(3)>,
L<CURLOPT_VERBOSE(3)>,
L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-extentlist-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-file-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-readahead-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-retry-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-ssh-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-torrent-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-plugin(3)>,
L<http://curl.haxx.se>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones

Parts derived from Alexander Graf's "QEMU Block driver for CURL images".

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2014-2020 Red Hat Inc.
