=head1 NAME

nbdkit-cacheextents-filter - cache extents

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbdkit --filter=cacheextents plugin

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<nbdkit-cacheextents-filter> is a filter that caches the result of last
extents() call.

A common use for this filter is to improve performance when using a
client performing a linear pass over the entire image while asking for
only one extent at a time (such as S<C<qemu-img convert>>), but where
the plugin can provide multiple extents for the same high latency as a
single extent (such as L<nbdkit-vddk-plugin(1)>).  For example:

 nbdkit -U - --filter=cacheextents --run 'qemu-img map $nbd' vddk ...

For files with big extents (when it is unlikely for one extents() call
to return multiple different extents) this does not slow down the
access.

This filter only caches image metadata; to also cache image contents,
place this filter between L<nbdkit-cache-filter(1)> and the plugin.

=head1 PARAMETERS

There are no parameters specific to nbdkit-cacheextents-filter.  Any
parameters are passed through to and processed by the underlying
plugin in the normal way.

=head1 FILES

=over 4

=item F<$filterdir/nbdkit-cacheextents-filter.so>

The filter.

Use C<nbdkit --dump-config> to find the location of C<$filterdir>.

=back

=head1 VERSION

C<nbdkit-cacheextents-filter> first appeared in nbdkit 1.14.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-cache-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-readahead-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-vddk-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-filter(3)>,
L<qemu-img(1)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Martin Kletzander

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2019 Red Hat Inc.
