=head1 NAME

nbdkit-linuxdisk-plugin - create virtual Linux disk from directory

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbdkit linuxdisk [dir=]DIRECTORY
                  [label=LABEL] [type=ext2|ext3|ext4]
                  [size=[+]SIZE]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<nbdkit-linuxdisk-plugin> is a plugin for L<nbdkit(1)> which creates
an ext2-, ext3- or ext4-formatted disk image from a directory on the
fly.  The files in the specified directory (and subdirectories) appear
in the virtual disk, which is served read-only over the NBD protocol.

The virtual disk is partitioned with a single GPT partition containing
the filesystem.

The virtual disk can be used as a Linux root (or other) filesystem.
Most features of Linux filesystems are supported, such as hard links,
symbolic links, block special devices etc.

To create a FAT-formatted virtual floppy disk, see
L<nbdkit-floppy-plugin(1)>.  To create a CD/ISO, see
L<nbdkit-iso-plugin(1)>.  To create an empty filesystem for each
client that connects (like a "remote tmpfs") use
L<nbdkit-tmpdisk-plugin(1)>.

=head1 EXAMPLES

=over 4

=item nbdkit linuxdisk /path/to/directory label=ROOTFS

Create a virtual disk, giving it a filesystem label.  Note that
clients will not be able to modify the filesystem, so it is safe to
share it with multiple clients.

=item nbdkit --filter=cow linuxdisk /path/to/directory

Add a writable overlay (see L<nbdkit-cow-filter(1)>, allowing the disk
to be written by the client.  B<Multiple clients must not be allowed
to connect at the same time> (even if they all mount it read-only) as
this will cause disk corruption.

=item nbdkit --filter=cow linuxdisk /path/to/directory size=+1G

The same but specifying that at least 1G of free space should be
available in the filesystem (not including the space taken by the
initial filesystem).

=item nbdkit --filter=partition linuxdisk /path/to/directory partition=1

Instead of serving a partitioned disk image, serve just the "naked"
filesystem (ie. the first partition, see
L<nbdkit-partition-filter(1)>).

=item nbdkit -U - linuxdisk /path/to/directory
--run 'nbdcopy "$uri" ext2fs.img'

This serves nothing.  Instead it turns a directory into a disk image,
writing it to F<ext2fs.img> (see L<nbdkit-captive(1)>).  The resulting
image is a partitioned disk.

=item Create a minimal virtual appliance

This creates and boots a minimal L<busybox(1)>-based virtual
appliance.  This assumes that your kernel (F</boot/vmlinuz>) contains
the ext2 or ext4 driver compiled in, but most Linux distro kernels
have that.

 mkdir -p root/{bin,dev,proc,sbin,sys,usr/bin,usr/sbin}
 sudo mknod root/dev/console c 5 1
 cp /sbin/busybox root/sbin/
 ln root/sbin/busybox root/sbin/init
 ln root/sbin/busybox root/bin/ls
 ln root/sbin/busybox root/bin/sh
 nbdkit -U - linuxdisk root --run '
   qemu-kvm -display none -kernel /boot/vmlinuz -drive file=nbd:unix:$unixsocket,snapshot=on -append "console=ttyS0 root=/dev/sda1 rw" -serial stdio
 '

You can drop any extra files you need into the F<root/> directory and
they will be copied into the appliance before boot.  After booting
type these commands to complete the environmental setup:

 /sbin/busybox --install
 mount -t proc proc /proc
 mount -t sysfs sys /sys

=back

=head1 PARAMETERS

=over 4

=item [B<dir=>]DIRECTORY

Specify the directory containing files and subdirectories which will
be added to the virtual disk.  Files inside this directory will appear
in the root directory of the virtual disk.

This parameter is required.

C<dir=> is a magic config key and may be omitted in most cases.
See L<nbdkit(1)/Magic parameters>.

=item B<label=>LABEL

The optional label for the filesystem.

=item B<size=>SIZE

=item B<size=+>SIZE

The total (virtual) size of the filesystem.

If the C<size> parameter is omitted the plugin will try to size the
filesystem with just enough space to contain the files and directories
that are initially loaded, and there will not be much extra space.

Using C<size=SIZE> specifies the required virtual size of the whole
filesystem (including initial files and extra space).  If this is set
too small for the initial filesystem then the plugin will fail to
start.

Using C<size=+SIZE> specifies the minimum free space required after
the initial filesystem has been loaded.  (The actual free space might
be slightly larger).

=item B<type=ext2>

=item B<type=ext3>

=item B<type=ext4>

Select the filesystem type.  The default is C<ext2>.

=back

=head1 NOTES

=head2 Users and groups

The original file UIDs and GIDs are recreated as far as possible.
Note that UIDs/GIDs will likely map to different users and groups when
read by a virtual machine or other NBD client machine.

=head1 ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

=over 4

=item C<TMPDIR>

The filesystem image is stored in a temporary file located in
F</var/tmp> by default.  You can override this location by setting the
C<TMPDIR> environment variable before starting nbdkit.

=back

=head1 FILES

=over 4

=item F<$plugindir/nbdkit-linuxdisk-plugin.so>

The plugin.

Use C<nbdkit --dump-config> to find the location of C<$plugindir>.

=back

=head1 VERSION

C<nbdkit-linuxdisk-plugin> first appeared in nbdkit 1.12.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<mke2fs(8)>,
L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-plugin(3)>,
L<nbdkit-captive(1)>,
L<nbdkit-cow-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-file-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-floppy-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-iso-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-partition-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-partitioning-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-tmpdisk-plugin(1)>,

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright Red Hat
