=head1 NAME

nbdkit-blocksize-filter - nbdkit blocksize filter

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbdkit --filter=blocksize plugin [minblock=SIZE] [maxdata=SIZE] \
     [maxlen=SIZE] [plugin-args...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<nbdkit-blocksize-filter> is a filter that ensures various block size
limits are met on transactions presented to the plugin.  The NBD
protocol permits clients to send requests with a granularity as small
as 1 byte or as large as nearly 4 gigabytes, although it suggests that
portable clients should align requests to 512 bytes and not exceed 32
megabytes without prior coordination with the server.

Meanwhile, some plugins require requests to be aligned to 512-byte
multiples, or may enforce a maximum transaction size to bound the time
or memory resources spent by any one command (note that nbdkit itself
refuses a read or write larger than 64 megabytes, while many other NBD
servers limit things to 32 megabytes).  The blocksize filter can be
used to modify the client requests to meet the plugin restrictions.

This filter can be combined with L<nbdkit-blocksize-policy-filter(1)>
to advertise different block sizes to the client.

=head1 PARAMETERS

The nbdkit-blocksize-filter accepts the following parameters.

=over 4

=item B<minblock=>SIZE

The minimum block size and alignment to pass to the plugin.  This must
be a power of two, and no larger than 64k.  If omitted, this defaults
to the minimum block size of the underlying plugin, or 1 if the plugin
did not report a minimum block size.  The filter rounds up
read requests to alignment boundaries, performs read-modify-write
cycles for any unaligned head or tail of a write or zero request, and
silently ignores any unaligned head or tail of a trim request.  The
filter also truncates the plugin size down to an aligned value (as it
cannot safely operate on the unaligned tail).  If you need to round
the image size up instead to access the last few bytes, combine this
filter with L<nbdkit-truncate-filter(1)>.

This parameter understands the suffix 'k' for 1024.

=item B<maxdata=>SIZE

The maximum block size for any single transaction with data (read and
write).  If omitted, this defaults to the minimum of 64 megabytes (that
is, the nbdkit maximum) or any maximum reported by the underlying plugin.
This need not be a power of two, but must be an
integer multiple of C<minblock>.  The filter fragments any larger
client request into multiple plugin requests.

This parameter understands the suffixes 'k', 'M', and 'G' for powers
of 1024.

=item B<maxlen=>SIZE

The maximum length for any single transaction without data (trim, zero,
cache or extents).  If omitted, this defaults to 0xffffffff rounded down to
C<minblock> alignment (that is, the inherent 32-bit limit of the NBD
protocol).  This need not be a power of two, but must be an integer
multiple of C<minblock>, and should be at least as large as
C<maxdata>.  The filter fragments any larger client request into
multiple plugin requests.

This parameter understands the suffixes 'k', 'M', and 'G' for powers
of 1024.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

Allow an arbitrary client to use the VDDK plugin (which is limited to
512-byte blocks), without having to fix the client to avoid sending
unaligned requests:

 nbdkit --filter=blocksize vddk minblock=512 file=/absolute/path/to/file.vmdk

Allow an arbitrary client tuned to nbdkit's 64 megabyte sizing to
connect to a remote server that insists on 32 megabyte sizing, via the
nbd plugin:

 nbdkit --filter=blocksize nbd maxdata=32M socket=/path/to/socket

Serve a file as if it were a block device that insists on 4k
alignment, while still allowing access to any unaligned bytes at the
end of the file:

 nbdkit --filter=blocksize --filter=truncate file /path/to/file \
 minblock=4k round-up=4k

=head1 FILES

=over 4

=item F<$filterdir/nbdkit-blocksize-filter.so>

The filter.

Use C<nbdkit --dump-config> to find the location of C<$filterdir>.

=back

=head1 VERSION

C<nbdkit-blocksize-filter> first appeared in nbdkit 1.4.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-nbd-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-vddk-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-filter(3)>,
L<nbdkit-blocksize-policy-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-truncate-filter(1)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Eric Blake

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright Red Hat
