=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

nbdkit-split-plugin - nbdkit plugin to concatenate split files into one disk

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbdkit split file=file1 [file=file2 file=file3 ...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<nbdkit-split-plugin> is a file plugin for L<nbdkit(1)>.  One or more
filenames may be given using the [file=FILENAME] parameter.  These
files are logically concatenated into a single disk image.

=head2 Differences from nbdkit-file-plugin

Normally to serve a single file you should use
L<nbdkit-file-plugin(1)>.  This plugin differs from nbdkit-file-plugin
as follows:

=over 4

=item *

nbdkit-file-plugin is faster and more efficient.  It has a fully
parallel implementation, and does not have to deal with the complexity
of locating the correct file to serve or splitting requests across
files.

=item *

nbdkit-file-plugin allows you to resize the underlying file
dynamically.  The underlying files must B<not> be resized when using
the split plugin.

=item *

nbdkit-file-plugin can handle block devices, but the split plugin can
only handle plain files.

=item *

nbdkit-file-plugin handles writes of blocks of zeroes efficiently, but
the split plugin cannot.

=item *

nbdkit-file-plugin can "punch holes" in the backing file in response
to a trim request from the client, but the split plugin does not
support this.

=back

=head1 PARAMETERS

=over 4

=item B<file=FILENAME>

One or more files to open.  They are logically concatenated in
the order they appear on the command line.

This parameter must appear at least once.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-plugin(3)>,
L<nbdkit-file-plugin(1)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2017 Red Hat Inc.

=head1 LICENSE

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
met:

=over 4

=item *

Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

=item *

Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

=item *

Neither the name of Red Hat nor the names of its contributors may be
used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without
specific prior written permission.

=back

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY RED HAT AND CONTRIBUTORS ''AS IS'' AND
ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL RED HAT OR
CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF
USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND
ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
SUCH DAMAGE.
