=head1 NAME

nbdkit-scan-filter - scan disk prefetching data ahead of sequential reads

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbdkit --filter=scan PLUGIN [scan-ahead=false] [scan-clock=false]
                             [scan-forever=true] [scan-size=]NN

=for paragraph

 nbdkit --filter=scan --filter=cache PLUGIN

=for paragraph

 nbdkit --filter=scan --filter=cow PLUGIN cow-on-cache=true

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<nbdkit-scan-filter> is a filter that scans the disk prefetching
data.  It is sometimes useful if you expect that the client will read
the disk sequentially.

The basic operation of the filter is that when a client connects, the
filter will start issuing C<.cache> (prefetch) requests to the plugin
across the whole disk.  Plugins which support this command will
prefetch the data, making subsequent reads faster.  For plugins which
do not support this command, you can inject L<nbdkit-cache-filter(1)>
below (after) this filter, giving approximately the same effect.
L<nbdkit-cow-filter(1)> can be used instead of nbdkit-cache-filter, if
you add the C<cow-on-cache=true> option.

Various parameters can be used to tune scanning, although the defaults
should be suitable in most cases.

A similar filter is L<nbdkit-readahead-filter(1)>.

=head2 Limitations

In a number of significant cases this filter will do nothing.  The
filter will print a warning message if this happens.

=over 4

=item Thread model must be parallel*

For example L<nbdkit-curl-plugin(1)> only supports
C<serialize_requests>, and so this filter cannot perform prefetches in
parallel with the read requests.

=item Only scans while clients are connected*

The current filter only scans while there is at least one client
connected.

=item Only scans the default export*

The current filter only scans the default export and ignores all
clients connecting to the non-default export name.

*We may be able to lift these restrictions in future.

=item Underlying filters or plugin must support C<.cache> (prefetch)

Very many plugins do not have the concept of prefetching and/or
do not implement the C<.cache> callback, and so there is no
way for this filter to issue prefetches.

You can usually get around this by adding I<--filter=cache> after this
filter as explained above.

=item Prefetching the whole disk may load it all into cache

In particular if you use this filter together with
L<nbdkit-cache-filter(1)> or L<nbdkit-cow-filter(1)>, they will cache
the whole content of the plugin into a temporary file.  This may be
many gigabytes of data, consuming all space in F</var/tmp>.  Of course
this is the whole point of using this filter, but you should be aware
of it.

If using the cache filter, the total size of the cache can be limited
(see L<nbdkit-cache-filter(1)/CACHE MAXIMUM SIZE>).

=back

=head1 PARAMETERS

=over 4

=item B<scan-ahead=false>

By default the filter tries to stay ahead of incoming read requests.
That is to say, it starts prefetching at the beginning of the disk and
continues incrementally, but if the client issues a read beyond the
current prefetch point then the filter skips forward and begins
prefetching after the read.

However if you set this parameter to false, then this behaviour is
disabled.  The filter simply prefetches sequentially regardless of
client requests.

=item B<scan-clock=false>

By default, if all clients disconnect and then another client
connects, prefetching resumes at the same place in the disk.  (Like
stopping and starting a clock.)

If you set this parameter to false, then the filter starts prefetching
from the beginning of the disk again.

=item B<scan-forever=true>

By default the filter scans over the disk once and then stops.

If you set this parameter to true, then after the disk has been
prefetched completely, the filter goes back to the beginning and
starts over, repeating this for as long as nbdkit is running and there
are clients connected.

=item B<scan-size=>NN

This parameter controls the prefetch block size.  The default is
C<2M>.  This must be a power of 2 and most plugins will have their own
limits on the amount of data they can prefetch in a single request.

=back

=head1 FILES

=over 4

=item F<$filterdir/nbdkit-scan-filter.so>

The filter.

Use C<nbdkit --dump-config> to find the location of C<$filterdir>.

=back

=head1 VERSION

C<nbdkit-scan-filter> first appeared in nbdkit 1.32.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-cache-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-cow-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-file-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-readahead-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-retry-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-torrent-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-vddk-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-filter(3)>,
L<qemu-img(1)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright Red Hat
