=head1 NAME

nbdkit-rate-filter - limit bandwidth by connection or server

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbdkit --filter=rate PLUGIN [PLUGIN-ARGS...]
                      [rate=BITSPERSEC]
                      [connection-rate=BITSPERSEC]
                      [rate-file=FILENAME]
                      [connection-rate-file=FILENAME]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<nbdkit-rate-filter> is a filter that limits the bandwidth that can
be used by the server.  Limits can be applied per connection and/or
for the server as a whole.

=head1 EXAMPLES

=over 4

=item nbdkit --filter=rate memory 64M rate=1M

Create a 64M RAM disk and limit server bandwidth as a whole to a
maximum of S<1 Mbps> (megabit per second).

=item nbdkit --filter=rate memory 64M connection-rate=50K

Limit each connection to S<50 Kbps> (kilobits per second).  However as
there is no limit to the number of simultaneous connections this does
not limit overall server bandwidth.

=item nbdkit --filter=rate memory 64M connection-rate=50K rate=1M

Limit each connection to S<50 Kbps>.  Additionally the total bandwidth
across all connections to the server is limited to S<1 Mbps>.

=item nbdkit --filter=rate memory 64M rate=1M rate-file=/tmp/rate

Initially limit bandwidth to S<1 Mbps>.  While the server is running
the rate can be adjusted dynamically by writing a different rate into
F</tmp/rate>.

=back

=head1 PARAMETERS

=over 4

=item B<connection-rate=>BITSPERSEC

Limit each connection to C<BITSPERSEC>.

=item B<rate=>BITSPERSEC

Limit total bandwidth across all connections to C<BITSPERSEC>.

=item B<connection-rate-file=>FILENAME

=item B<rate-file=>FILENAME

Adjust the per-connection or total bandwidth dynamically by writing
C<BITSPERSEC> into C<FILENAME>.  See L</DYNAMIC ADJUSTMENT> below.

=back

C<BITSPERSEC> can be specified as a simple number, or you can use a
number followed by C<K>, C<M> etc to mean kilobits, megabits and so
on.

=head1 DYNAMIC ADJUSTMENT

Using the C<connection-rate-file> or C<rate-file> parameters you can
dynamically adjust the bandwidth while the server is running.

If the file is not present when the server starts up then the initial
rate is taken from the associated C<connection-rate> or C<rate>
parameter (or if that is not present, then it is unlimited).  If the
file is deleted while the server is running then the last rate read
from the file continues to be used.

The file should be updated atomically (eg. create a new file, then
rename or L<mv(1)> the new file over the old file).

There will be a short delay between the file being updated and the new
rate coming into effect.

=head1 NOTES

You can specify C<rate> and C<connection-rate> on their own or
together.  If you specify neither, the filter is turned off.

The rate filter approximates the bandwidth used by the NBD protocol on
the wire.  Some operations such as zeroing and trimming are
effectively free (because only a tiny NBD message is sent over the
network) and so do not count against the bandwidth limit.  NBD and TCP
protocol overhead is not included, so you may find that other tools
such as L<tc(8)> and L<iptables(8)> give more accurate results.

There are separate bandwidth limits for read and write (ie. download
and upload to the server).

If the size of requests made by your client is much larger than the
rate limit then you can see long, lumpy sleeps in this filter.  In the
future we may modify the filter to break up large requests
automatically in order to limit the length of sleeps.  Placing the
L<nbdkit-blocksize-filter(1)> in front of this filter may help in the
meantime.

=head1 FILES

=over 4

=item F<$filterdir/nbdkit-rate-filter.so>

The filter.

Use C<nbdkit --dump-config> to find the location of C<$filterdir>.

=back

=head1 VERSION

C<nbdkit-rate-filter> first appeared in nbdkit 1.12.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-blocksize-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-delay-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-exitlast-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-limit-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-filter(3)>,
L<iptables(8)>,
L<tc(8)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2019 Red Hat Inc.
