=head1 NAME

nbdkit-loop - use nbdkit with the Linux kernel client to create loop
devices and loop mounts

=head1 DESCRIPTION

nbdkit (server) can be used with the Linux kernel nbd (client) in a
loop mode allowing any of the plugins supported by nbdkit to be turned
into Linux block devices.

In addition to L<nbdkit(1)> itself, the main commands you will use
are:

=over 4

=item nbd-client localhost /dev/nbd0

Attaches a locally running nbdkit instance to the kernel device
F</dev/nbd0>.

=item nbd-client -unix /tmp/socket /dev/nbd0

Alternative method using a Unix domain socket instead of a public
TCP/IP socket.  Use C<nbdkit -U /tmp/socket> to serve.

=item nbd-client -d /dev/nbd0

Detaches F</dev/nbd0>.

=item nbd-client -c /dev/nbd0

Queries whether F</dev/nbd0> is attached or not.

=item modprobe nbd

You may be need to run this command once to load the nbd client kernel
module.

=back

The L<nbd-client(8)> and L<modprobe(8)> commands must be run as root.

=head2 Warning: Do not loop mount untrusted filesystems

Untrusted filesystems and untrusted disk images should not be loop
mounted because they could contain exploits that attack your host
kernel.  Use the tools from L<libguestfs(3)> instead since it safely
isolates untrusted filesystems from the host.

=head2 Loop mount a filesystem from a compressed file

If you have a filesystem or disk image in xz-compressed format then
you can use L<nbdkit-xz-filter(1)> and L<nbdkit-file-plugin(1)> to
loop mount it as follows:

 nbdkit --filter=xz file disk.xz
 nbd-client localhost /dev/nbd0
 mount /dev/nbd0p1 /mnt

=head2 Loop mount a filesystem from a web server

You can use L<nbdkit-curl-plugin(1)> to loop mount a filesystem from a
disk image on a web server:

 nbdkit [--filter=xz] curl https://example.com/disk.img
 nbd-client localhost /dev/nbd0
 mount /dev/nbd0p1 /mnt

Use I<--filter=xz> if the remote image is XZ-compressed.

=head2 Create a giant btrfs filesystem

nbdkit is useful for testing the limits of Linux filesystems.  Using
L<nbdkit-memory-plugin(1)> you can create virtual disks stored in RAM
with a virtual size up to S<2⁶³-1 bytes>, and then create filesystems
on these:

 nbdkit memory $(( 2**63 - 1 ))
 nbd-client localhost /dev/nbd0

Partition the device using GPT, creating a single partition with all
default settings:

 gdisk /dev/nbd0

Make a btrfs filesystem on the disk and mount it:

 mkfs.btrfs -K /dev/nbd0p1
 mount /dev/nbd0p1 /mnt

=head2 Inject errors into Linux devices

Using L<nbdkit-error-filter(1)> you can see how Linux devices react to
errors:

 nbdkit --filter=error \
        memory 64M \
        error-rate=100% error-file=/tmp/inject
 nbd-client localhost /dev/nbd0
 mkfs -t ext4 /dev/nbd0
 mount /dev/nbd0 /mnt

Inject errors by touching F</tmp/inject>, and stop injecting errors by
removing this file.

=head2 Write Linux block devices in shell script

Using L<nbdkit-sh-plugin(3)> you can write custom Linux block devices
in shell script for testing.  For example the following shell script
creates a disk which contains a bad sector:

 #!/bin/bash -
 case "$1" in
     thread_model) echo parallel ;;
     get_size) echo 64M ;;
     pread)
         if [ $4 -le 100000 ] && [ $(( $4+$3 )) -gt 100000 ]; then
             echo EIO Bad block >&2
             exit 1
         else
             dd if=/dev/zero count=$3 iflag=count_bytes
         fi ;;
     *) exit 2 ;;
 esac

Create a loop from this shell script using:

 nbdkit sh ./bad-sector.sh
 nbd-client localhost /dev/nbd0

You can then try running tests such as:

 badblocks /dev/nbd0

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-client(1)>,
L<nbdkit-plugin(3)>,
L<loop(4)>,
L<losetup(8)>,
L<mount(8)>,
L<nbdfuse(1)>,
L<nbd-client(8)>,
L<modprobe(8)>,
L<libguestfs(3)>, L<http://libguestfs.org>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright Red Hat
