=head1 NAME

nbdkit-release-notes-1.4 - release notes for nbdkit 1.4

=head1 DESCRIPTION

These are the release notes for nbdkit stable release 1.4.
This describes the major changes since 1.2.

nbdkit 1.4.0 was released on 6th July 2018.

=head2 New features

=over 4

=item *

You can write plugins in Tcl, see
L<nbdkit-tcl-plugin(3)>.

=item *

Other new plugins:
nbdkit-ext2-plugin,
L<nbdkit-random-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-zero-plugin(1)>.

=item *

New filters:
L<nbdkit-blocksize-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-fua-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-log-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-nozero-filter(1)>.

=item *

Bash tab completion of nbdkit commands.

=item *

TLS Pre-Shared Keys (PSK) authentication.

=item *

We now default to the newstyle protocol, use -o to select oldstyle.

=item *

On-demand ramping of thread pool.

=item *

TRIM support in the file plugin.

=item *

Reworked error handling.

=item *

New C<can_zero>, C<can_fua> methods and better handling of FUA.

=item *

New C<nbdkit_realpath> function.

=item *

C<nbdkit_parse_size> rewritten.

=item *

Better handling of shutdown path to ensure plugins can do long cleanups.

=item *

New C<PKG_CHECK_VAR> variables.

=item *

Regression test for IPv6 connections.

=item *

Of course numerous smaller bug fixes and improvements.

=back

=head2 Acknowledgements

Thanks in particular to Eric Blake and Pino Toscano.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<https://www.redhat.com/archives/libguestfs/2018-July/msg00023.html>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Eric Blake

Richard W.M. Jones

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright Red Hat
