=head1 NAME

nbdkit-release-notes-1.32 - release notes for nbdkit 1.32

=head1 DESCRIPTION

These are the release notes for nbdkit stable release 1.32.
This describes the major changes since 1.30.

nbdkit 1.32.0 was released on B<1 August 2022>.

=head2 Security

There were no security issues found.  All past security issues and
information about how to report new ones can be found in
L<nbdkit-security(1)>.

=head2 Plugins

L<nbdkit-ssh-plugin(1)> has new C<create=(true|false)>, C<create-size>
and C<create-mode> parameters to allow remote files to be created.

L<nbdkit-S3-plugin(1)> was largely rewritten and should have better
performance and compatibility.  It also supports
splitting/concatenating multiple S3 objects into one virtual disk.
(Nikolaus Rath)

=head2 Filters

New L<nbdkit-luks-filter(1)> allows you to open, read and write LUKSv1
disk images.  It is compatible with qemu and dm-crypt.

New L<nbdkit-scan-filter(1)> which simply scans across the disk
issuing prefetches.

L<nbdkit-readahead-filter(1)> has been completely rewritten so now it
uses prefetching from a parallel thread.  The old readahead filter was
deprecated, but if you are using it you should carefully read the new
documentation because it may require changes.

L<nbdkit-stats-filter(1)> now summarises block size and alignment of
requests (Nikolaus Rath).

L<nbdkit-blocksize-filter(1)> now handles parallel writes without
losing writes because of overlapping read-modify-write cycles.  If you
are using the blocksize filter it is recommended to upgrade.  (Eric
Blake)

L<nbdkit-rate-filter(1)> has a new C<burstiness> parameter allowing
the bucket capacity to be adjusted, which helps with smoothing out
large, lumpy client requests.

=head2 Language bindings

Add C<nbdkit.parse_size()> binding for Python (Nikolaus Rath).

Compatibility with OCaml 4.14.

Compatibility with Perl 5.36.

=head2 Server

Add macOS (Darwin) support.  See the relevant section in the top level
F<README.md> file.

kTLS should now work (transparently) when available in the kernel and
GnuTLS.  Use of kTLS will be indicated in debug output.  (Daiki Ueno,
František Krenželok)

=begin comment

=head2 API

=end comment

=head2 Bug fixes

L<nbdkit-sh-plugin(3)> now handles inline scripts correctly on
non-glibc platforms (Martin Kletzander).

Catch the case where nbdkit ends up linked to OpenSSL (because of a
transient dependency through GnuTLS) which broke
L<nbdkit-vddk-plugin(1)>.  For more details see
L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/2057490>.

Fix memory leak in L<nbdkit-python-plugin(3)> which would lead to
large amounts of memory being leaked if your plugin implemented
C<list_exports> or C<extents> callbacks (Eric Blake).

The L<nbdkit-curl-plugin(1)> cookie/header scripts feature now
generates an error properly if the shell script fails.

Fix further "phone home" messages in L<nbdkit-vddk-plugin(1)> (thanks
Ming Xie).

Improve error message from L<nbdkit-vddk-plugin(1)> when the
thumbprint parameter is wrong (Laszlo Ersek).

Fix C<NBDKIT_CACHE_EMULATE> and C<NBDKIT_ZERO_EMULATE> in filters.
These could cause assertion failures before.  (Eric Blake)

Fix L<nbdkit-protect-filter(1)> test if dependencies are missing
(thanks Jim Fehlig).

Fix a bounds error in L<nbdkit-checkwrite-filter(1)>.

The server will now fail and exit early if the I<--tls-verify-peer>
option is used on platforms which do not support it.  Previously it
would only fail when a client connected using TLS.

Various bugs found by Coverity were analysed and fixed (Eric Blake).

=head2 Documentation

Document how to write plugins and filters in C++.  This has always
been possible, but was never documented before.

Document how to run nbdkit from inetd or xinetd superservers.

Fix how verbatim paragraphs in the documentation are rendered in HTML.

Document how to use nbdkit + TLS with L<nbd-client(1)>.

=head2 Tests

Various enhancements to fuzzing including supporting AFL++, AFL++
clang-LTO.  Add C<./configure --disable-linker-script> which is needed
to use ASAN, and document how to use ASAN when fuzzing.

Improve runtime of linuxdisk test (Eric Blake).

Add interoperability tests with L<nbd-client(1)>, the Linux kernel
client, including TLS support.

=head2 Build

Add GitLab continuous integration (CI) at
L<https://gitlab.com/nbdkit/nbdkit/-/pipelines> and many miscellaneous
build fixes (Martin Kletzander).

There are now C<string_vector> and C<const_string_vector> defined
under F<common/utils> and used consistently throughout the code.

Microsoft Visual Studio Code formatting settings are available (in
F<.vscode/>) (Nikolaus Rath).

Remove F<scripts/vddk-open.sh>.  It is now available as a separate
project: L<https://gitlab.com/nbdkit/vddk-remote>

C<ARRAY_SIZE> macro added to simplify static array sizing (thanks
Laszlo Ersek).

=begin comment

=head2 Internals

=end comment

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Authors of nbdkit 1.32:

=begin comment

git shortlog -s v1.30.0..

=end comment

=over 4

=item Alan Somers

=item Eric Blake

=item Laszlo Ersek

=item Martin Kletzander

=item Nikolaus Rath

=item Richard W.M. Jones

=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright Red Hat
