=head1 NAME

nbdkit - which parts of the NBD protocol nbdkit supports

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbdkit [-n|--newstyle] [--mask-handshake MASK] [--no-sr] [-o|--oldstyle]
        [...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This page documents the level of support in nbdkit for various parts
of the NBD protocol.

=head1 NEW STYLE VS OLD STYLE PROTOCOL

The NBD protocol comes in two incompatible forms that we call
"oldstyle" and "newstyle".  Unfortunately which protocol you should
use depends on the client and cannot be known in advance, nor can it
be negotiated from the server side.

nbdkit defaults to the newstyle protocol since nbdkit E<ge> 1.3.  The
newstyle protocol is better in every respect than the oldstyle
protocol and you should prefer it if possible.  The newstyle protocol
also includes an extension where a client may request structured
replies for even more capabilities, such as sparse reads or obtaining
block status.  By default, nbdkit advertises as many features as it
can support (in some cases, this can be limited by what callbacks the
plugin handles), even if the client does not negotiate to use all
advertised features.

Nbdkit also includes some options that are useful mainly when
performing integration tests, for proving whether clients have sane
fallback behavior when dealing various older servers permitted by the
NBD protocol.  Use the I<--no-sr> flag to force the newstyle protocol
to decline any client request for structured replies.  Use the
I<--mask-handshake> parameter to mask off particular global features
which are advertised during new-style handshake (defaulting to all
supported bits set).  Clearing bit 0 (the low order bit) limits a
client to using just C<NBD_OPT_EXPORT_NAME> (and is incompatible with
TLS or structured replies); clearing bit 1 causes the handshake to
send more padding bytes in response to C<NBD_OPT_EXPORT_NAME>.  Other
bits in the mask will only have an effect if the NBD protocol is
extended in the future to define other global bits.

Use the I<-o> or I<--oldstyle> flag to force the oldstyle protocol.
In this mode, I<--no-sr> and I<--mask-handshake> have no effect.

=head2 Common clients and the protocol they require

 Client                          Protocol
 ------------------------------------------------------------
 qemu <= 2.5 without exportname  oldstyle
 qemu <= 2.5 with exportname     newstyle
 qemu >= 2.6                     client can talk either protocol
 qemu >= 2.11                    client tries structured replies
 nbd-client < 3.10               client can talk either protocol
 nbd-client >= 3.10              newstyle, no structured replies
 any TLS (encrypted) client      newstyle
 nbdkit nbd plugin               client can talk either protocol
 nbdkit >= 1.13.3                nbd plugin tries structured replies
 libnbd                          either protocol, tries structured replies

=head2 Errors seen if using the wrong protocol

If you use qemu E<le> 2.5 without the exportname field against a
newstyle server, it will give the error:

 Server requires an export name

If you use qemu E<le> 2.5 with the exportname field against an
oldstyle server, it will give the error:

 Server does not support export names

If you use the oldstyle protocol with nbd-client E<ge> 3.10, it will
give the error:

 Error: It looks like you're trying to connect to an oldstyle server.

=head2 NBD protocol and port number

Port 10809/tcp is reserved by IANA for the NBD protocol, but you can
use nbdkit on any port or on Unix domain sockets.

The NBD protocol specification claims that you should always use
newstyle when using port 10809, and use oldstyle on all other ports,
but this claim is not based on the reality of what NBD servers do, and
nbdkit does not require or encourage this.

=head1 NBD PROTOCOL FEATURES SUPPORTED BY NBDKIT

=over 4

=item newstyle protocol

Supported in nbdkit E<ge> 1.1.12, and the default in nbdkit E<ge> 1.3.

=item export names

Partially supported in nbdkit E<ge> 1.1.12.  Support for plugins to
read the client export name added in nbdkit E<ge> 1.15.2.

Versions of nbdkit before 1.16 could advertise a single export name to
clients, via a now deprecated side effect of the I<-e> option.  In nbdkit
1.15.2, plugins could read the client requested export name using
C<nbdkit_export_name()> and serve different content.

=item C<NBD_FLAG_NO_ZEROES>

Supported in nbdkit E<ge> 1.1.13.

This protocol optimization avoids sending a useless block of zero
bytes during protocol negotiation.

=item C<NBD_CMD_WRITE_ZEROES>

Supported in nbdkit E<ge> 1.1.13.

=item TLS with X.509 certificates

Supported in nbdkit E<ge> 1.1.15.

=item TLS with Pre-Shared Keys (PSK)

Supported in nbdkit E<ge> 1.4.0.

=item C<NBD_OPT_GO>

Supported in nbdkit E<ge> 1.5.3.

This protocol enhancement allows the server to return errors when
negotiating the export name.

=item C<NBD_OPT_INFO>

Supported in nbdkit E<ge> 1.9.3.

This protocol enhancement allows a client to inspect details about
the export without actually connecting.

=item C<NBD_FLAG_CAN_MULTI_CONN>

Supported in nbdkit E<ge> 1.9.9.

=item Structured Replies

Supported in nbdkit E<ge> 1.11.8.

However we don’t expose the capability to send structured replies to
plugins yet, nor do we send human-readable error messages using this
facility.

In nbdkit E<ge> 1.13.9>, the command-line option I<--no-sr> can be
used to disable server support for structured replies, for testing
client fallbacks.

=item Metadata Querying

Supported in nbdkit E<ge> 1.11.8.

=item Block Status

Supported in nbdkit E<ge> 1.11.10.

Only C<base:allocation> (ie. querying which parts of an image are
sparse) is supported.

Sparse reads (using C<NBD_REPLY_TYPE_OFFSET_HOLE> are not directly
supported, but a client can use block status to infer which portions
of the export do not need to be read.

=item C<NBD_FLAG_DF>

Supported in nbdkit E<ge> 1.11.11.

This protocol extension allows a client to force an all-or-none read
when structured replies are in effect. However, the flag is a no-op
until we extend the plugin API to allow a fragmented read in the first
place.

=item C<NBD_CMD_CACHE>

Supported in nbdkit E<ge> 1.13.4.

This protocol extension allows a client to inform the server about
intent to access a portion of the export, to allow the server an
opportunity to cache things appropriately.

=item C<NBD_CMD_FLAG_FAST_ZERO>

Supported in nbdkit E<ge> 1.15.0.

This protocol extension allows a server to advertise that it can rank
all zero requests as fast or slow, at which point the client can make
fast zero requests which fail immediately with C<ENOTSUP> if the
request is no faster than a counterpart write would be, while normal
zero requests still benefit from compressed network traffic regardless
of the time taken.

=item Resize Extension

I<Not supported>.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<https://github.com/NetworkBlockDevice/nbd/blob/master/doc/proto.md>,
L<https://nbd.sourceforge.io/>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Eric Blake

Richard W.M. Jones

Pino Toscano

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2013-2020 Red Hat Inc.
