=head1 NAME

nbdkit-release-notes-1.8 - release notes for nbdkit 1.8

=head1 DESCRIPTION

These are the release notes for nbdkit stable release 1.8.
This describes the major changes since 1.6.

nbdkit 1.8.0 was released on 12th November 2018.

=head2 New features

=over 4

=item *

New plugin: L<nbdkit-sh-plugin(1)> for running shell scripts and other
external programs.  See:
L<https://rwmj.wordpress.com/2018/09/09/write-nbdkit-plugins-in-shell-script/>

=item *

New plugin: L<nbdkit-partitioning-plugin(1)> which creates a
partitioned disk from a list of partitions in files.

=item *

New plugin: L<nbdkit-iso-plugin(1)> which creates an ISO (CD-ROM)
image on the fly from a directory of files.  See:
L<https://rwmj.wordpress.com/2018/10/18/new-in-nbdkit-create-an-iso-image-on-the-fly/>

=item *

New plugin: L<nbdkit-floppy-plugin(1)> which creates a virtual
FAT-formatted floppy disk from a directory of files.
L<https://rwmj.wordpress.com/2018/10/29/new-in-nbdkit-create-a-virtual-floppy-disk/>

=item *

Magic config key allows simpler invocation of many plugins, eg:

 nbdkit file file=foo

becomes:

 nbdkit file foo

=item *

L<nbdkit-data-plugin(1)>: Add F<disk2data.pl> script to generate data
parameters.

=item *

L<nbdkit-data-plugin(1)> Use C<<< <file >>> to inline a file.

=item *

L<nbdkit-vddk-plugin(1)>: Use S<I<-D vddk.diskinfo=1>> to enable extra
debug information.

=item *

tests: Use a helper function to refactor and simplify most tests.

=item *

L<nbdkit-partition-filter(1)>: Can handle E<gt> 128 GPT partitions.

=item *

nbdkit can be compiled on the Haiku operating system
(François Revol).

=item *

New C<nbdkit_parse_bool> API for parsing boolean parameters
(Eric Blake).

=item *

L<nbdkit-log-filter(1)>: Add C<logappend=[true|false]>
(Eric Blake).

=item *

L<nbdkit-ocaml-plugin(3)>: New C<set_error> and C<debug> calls.

=item *

Analyze code under AddressSanitizer and ThreadSanitizer and fix bugs
(Eric Blake).

=item *

Analyze code under Coverity and fix bugs.

=item *

Tests now run more quickly.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<https://www.redhat.com/archives/libguestfs/2018-November/msg00111.html>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Eric Blake

Richard W.M. Jones

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2018 Red Hat Inc.
