=head1 NAME

nbdkit-release-notes-1.16 - release notes for nbdkit 1.16

=head1 DESCRIPTION

These are the release notes for nbdkit stable release 1.16.
This describes the major changes since 1.14.

nbdkit 1.16.0 was released on 14th November 2019.

=head2 Security

Two security issues were found during development of nbdkit 1.16.
Fixes for these were backported to older stable branches.  Upgrading
to the fixed versions is highly recommended.  The new
L<nbdkit-security(1)> man page contains an up to date list of past
security issues.

=head3 CVE-2019-14850
denial of service due to premature opening of back-end connection

See the full announcement and links to mitigation, tests and fixes
here:
https://www.redhat.com/archives/libguestfs/2019-September/msg00084.html

=head3 CVE-2019-14851
assertion failure by issuing commands in the wrong order

This CVE was caused by the fix to the previous issue.

See the full announcement and links to mitigation, tests and fixes
here:
https://www.redhat.com/archives/libguestfs/2019-September/msg00272.html

=head2 New features

Add support for fast zeroing.  Plugins can expose this using the new
C<.can_fast_zero> method (Eric Blake).

L<nbdkit-partitioning-plugin(1)> allows use of C<mbr-id=default> or
C<type-guid=default> to go back to the default MBR byte or partition
type GUID.

New I<--mask-handshake> server flag can be used for testing client
feature negotiation (Eric Blake).

The client export name is passed to L<nbdkit-captive(1)> I<--run>
parameter as C<$exportname> (Eric Blake).

Captive I<--run> commands which fail (eg. aborting) now cause nbdkit
to exit with an error instead of errors being silently ignored (Eric
Blake).

File descriptors can be passed to password parameters, eg:
C<password=-3> which means that the password should be read from file
descriptor 3.

nbdkit can now serve over the C<AF_VSOCK> protocol (thanks Stefan
Hajnoczi).

New I<--log=null> option discards error messages.

=head2 Plugins

Python 2 support has been B<dropped> from L<nbdkit-python-plugin(3)>
in line with Python 2 end of life at the beginning of 2020.  Python
E<ge> 3.3 is required by this plugin.  If you wish to continue to use
Python 2 then you will need to use nbdkit 1.14.

New L<nbdkit-info-plugin(1)> which returns various server information
back to the client.  It can be used for testing server latency amongst
other things.

L<nbdkit-data-plugin(1)> now allows you to write C<BYTE*N> to get
repeated bytes (eg. S<C<nbdkit data data="0x55*4096">>).

L<nbdkit-ssh-plugin(1)> new parameter C<compression=true|false> to
control transport compression.

L<nbdkit-vddk-plugin(1)> is no longer compiled on non-x86 platforms
since VMware has only ever shipped VDDK on x86.

L<nbdkit-sh-plugin(1)> scripts can now see the client exportname and
can use the C<magic_config_key> feature.

=head2 Filters

New L<nbdkit-retry-filter(1)> which can reopen the plugin
transparently on certain types of failures (lots of help from Eric
Blake).

=head2 API

Macros C<NBDKIT_VERSION_MAJOR>, C<NBDKIT_VERSION_MINOR>,
C<NBDKIT_VERSION_MICRO> expose the compile-time version of nbdkit to
plugins and filters (Eric Blake).

Filters (which unlike plugins do I<not> have a public stable API) must
now exactly match the version of nbdkit when loaded (Eric Blake).

New C<.can_fast_zero> method (Eric Blake).

New C<nbdkit_export_name> server function for reading the export name
passed by the client.

New C<nbdkit_peer_name> server function to return the client address
(like L<getpeername(2)>).

New server functions for safely parsing integers: C<nbdkit_parse_int>,
C<nbdkit_parse_unsigned>, C<nbdkit_parse_int8_t>,
C<nbdkit_parse_uint8_t>, C<nbdkit_parse_int16_t>,
C<nbdkit_parse_uint16_t>, C<nbdkit_parse_int32_t>,
C<nbdkit_parse_uint32_t>, C<nbdkit_parse_int64_t>,
C<nbdkit_parse_uint64_t>.

=head2 Bug fixes

C<.trim> with FUA flag set now works (Eric Blake).

=head2 Documentation

The previous release notes have been turned into man pages.

=head2 Tests

Several tests now optionally use L<nbdsh(1)> instead of qemu-io.

You can now fuzz nbdkit using either American Fuzzy Lop or clang’s
libFuzzer.

Several tests have had sleep times increased to make them more stable
when run on slow or heavily loaded machines.

=head2 Internals

Reproducible builds (Chris Lamb).

Compile code with I<-Wshadow> warning (Eric Blake).

The internal backend system has been extensively overhauled.  In
particular this means that we now validate request ranges as requests
are passed between filters and down to the plugin, making it easier to
find bugs in filters early (Eric Blake).

Plugin size and C<can_*> flags are cached more aggressively by the
server (Eric Blake).

Variable Length Arrays (VLAs) on stack are now banned throughout the
code.

The F<nbd-protocol.h> header describing the NBD protocol is now shared
with L<libnbd(3)>.

Plugin C<.unload> method is now called after all worker threads have
exited, avoiding races at server shutdown.

Code was audited using Coverity and various problems were fixed.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Eric Blake

Richard W.M. Jones

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2019 Red Hat Inc.
