=head1 NAME

nbdkit-release-notes-1.20 - release notes for nbdkit 1.20

=head1 DESCRIPTION

These are the release notes for nbdkit stable release 1.20.
This describes the major changes since 1.18.

nbdkit 1.20.0 was released on B<XX XXXX> 2020.

=head2 Security

There were no security issues found.  All past security issues and
information about how to report new ones can be found in
L<nbdkit-security(1)>.

=head2 Plugins

New L<nbdkit-tmpdisk-plugin(1)> is a scriptable “remote tmpfs” for
creating temporary filesystems (eg. for thin clients), and also for
blank or prepopulated temporary disks.

L<nbdkit-data-plugin(1)> now has support for prepopulating disks with
more complex test patterns such as repeated sequences of bytes.

L<nbdkit-curl-plugin(1)> now supports setting a proxy, enabling TCP
keepalives, and disabling Nagle’s algorithm.

L<nbdkit-perl-plugin(1)> now supports API version 2.  In particular
the full NBD client flags are visible to plugins, along with support
for the C<.get_ready> callback.  Also there is a new function
C<Nbdkit::debug> which is a wrapper around the C<nbdkit_debug> API.

L<nbdkit-vddk-plugin(1)> drops support for VDDK 5.1.1.  This version
was last updated in 2014 and is no longer supported by VMware.  Since
this was the last version of VDDK to support i686, 32-bit support is
also dropped (Eric Blake).

=head2 Language bindings

Plugins may now be written in Golang, see L<nbdkit-golang-plugin(3)>
(thanks Dan Berrangé, James Shubin).

OCaml plugins can now access C<nbdkit_realpath>, C<nbdkit_nanosleep>,
C<nbdkit_export_name> and C<nbdkit_shutdown>.

Python plugins now transparently support fail-fast zero (Eric Blake).

=head2 Filters

New L<nbdkit-exitlast-filter(1)> causes nbdkit to exit after the last
client connection.

New L<nbdkit-limit-filter(1)> allows you to limit the number of
clients which can simultaneously connect to any plugin.

=head2 Server

The I<--run> option now waits for the nbdkit plugin and nbdkit to exit
before returning to the caller.  This allows for more predictable
clean up in shell scripts using this feature.

nbdkit I<--dump-config> output now includes separate lines for
C<version_major> and C<version_minor>, making it easier to find out
from shell scripts which version of nbdkit is installed.

nbdkit I<-s> option (which connects to the client over stdin/stdout)
now rejects various options that would also try to read from or write
to stdin/stdout, for example I<--dump-plugin> or C<password=->
(Eric Blake).

=head2 API

New C<nbdkit_shutdown> call which allows plugins to ask for nbdkit
to exit.  This is used to implement the new C<exitlast> filter.

New C<nbdkit_stdio_safe> call allows plugins to check if reading from
stdin or writing to stdout is safe, eg. if it is safe to read
passwords interactively (Eric Blake).

C<can_*> callbacks which return booleans can return any value E<ge> 1
to mean true.  Previous versions of nbdkit had inconsistent behaviour
if plugins returned anything other than 1 for true (Eric Blake).

=head2 Bug fixes

L<nbdkit-tar-plugin(1)> now works and there is a regression test for
it.

L<nbdkit-curl-plugin(1)> C<-D curl.version=1> option now works.

Fixed a rare hang when closing a connection in L<nbdkit-nbd-plugin(1)>
(Eric Blake).

Fix compilation on certain platforms with clang (Khem Raj).

Don’t leak C<$tmpdir> from L<nbdkit-sh-plugin(1)> into the I<--run>
subcommand.

nbdkit now correctly sets C<FD_CLOEXEC> when using systemd socket
activation (Eric Blake).

=head2 Documentation

The L<nbdkit-plugin(3)> man page has been overhauled completely to
make it easier to follow.  Also we now have documentation for how to
compile plugins in various environments which was missing before.

=head2 Tests

All valgrind tests now pass.

“Old plugin” tests were added for v1.18.2 on x86-64, and a variety of
old plugins compiled on i686.  The i686 plugins will allow us to test
for regressions in 32 bit support.

Tests of the nbd plugin should now be stable (Eric Blake).

There is an additional test combining the offset and truncate filters,
which tests several corner cases as well as providing tests of error
handling between layers.

=head2 Build

L<nbdkit-nbd-plugin(1)> now requires libnbd.  (If libnbd is not
present at build time then this plugin is not built).  The fallback
code in this plugin which made NBD connections by constructing NBD
command packets without using libnbd has been removed (Eric Blake).

F<scripts/git.orderfile> has been improved so that commands like
S<C<git diff>> and S<C<git show>> display OCaml sources in a natural
order with interface first followed by implementation.

Various fixes for MinGW.  Note MinGW / MSYS support is a work in
progress and not finished yet (Frank Gu).

Multiple fixes to Haiku build.

L<awk(1)> is no longer required to run the tests.  It was a “hidden”
required dependency, but all use of it has now been eliminated.

=head2 Internals

There is now an internal utility library for creating vectors/lists of
objects, for example lists of strings (F<common/utils/vector.h>).  It
is widely used by the server, plugins and filters.

F<README> discusses how to use L<lcov(1)> for code coverage reports.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Authors of nbdkit 1.20:

=over 4

=item Eric Blake

(33 commits)

=item Khem Raj

(1 commit)

=item Richard W.M. Jones

(121 commits)

=item Frank Gu

(6 commits)

=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2020 Red Hat Inc.
