=head1 NAME

nbdkit-retry-filter - reopen connection on error

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbdkit --filter=retry PLUGIN [retries=N] [retry-delay=N]
                              [retry-exponential=yes|no]
                              [retry-readonly=yes|no]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<nbdkit-retry-filter> is a filter that transparently reopens the
plugin connection when an error is encountered.  It can be used to
make long-running copy operations reliable in the presence of
temporary network failures, without requiring any changes to the
plugin or the NBD client.

An alternative and more fine-grained filter is
L<nbdkit-retry-request-filter(1)> which will retry only single
requests that fail.

Several optional parameters are available to control:

=over 4

=item *

how many times we retry,

=item *

the delay between retries, and whether we wait longer each time (known
as “exponential back-off”),

=item *

if we reopen the plugin in read-only mode after the first failure.

=back

The default (with no parameters) is designed to offer a happy medium
between recovering from short temporary failures but not doing
anything too bad when permanent or unrecoverable failures happen.  The
default behaviour is: we retry 5 times with exponential back-off,
waiting in total about 1 minute before we give up.

=head1 EXAMPLE

In this example we copy and convert a large file using
L<nbdkit-ssh-plugin(1)>, L<qemu-img(1)> and L<nbdkit-captive(1)>.

 nbdkit -U - \
   ssh host=remote.example.com /var/tmp/test.iso \
   --filter=retry \
   --run 'qemu-img convert -p -f raw $nbd -O qcow2 test.qcow2'

Without I<--filter=retry> a temporary failure would cause the copy to
fail (for example, the remote host’s firewall is restarted causing the
SSH connection to be dropped).  Adding this filter means that it may
be possible to transparently recover.

=head1 PARAMETERS

=over 4

=item B<retries=>N

The number of times any single operation will be retried before we
give up and fail the operation.  The default is 5.

=item B<retry-delay=>N

The number of seconds to wait before retrying.  The default is 2
seconds.

=item B<retry-exponential=yes>

Use exponential back-off.  The retry delay is doubled between each
retry.  This is the default.

=item B<retry-exponential=no>

Do not use exponential back-off.  The retry delay is the same between
each retry.

=item B<retry-readonly=yes>

As soon as a failure occurs, switch the underlying plugin to read-only
mode for the rest of this connection.  (A new NBD client connection
will still open the plugin in the original mode.)

=item B<retry-readonly=no>

Do not change the read-write/read-only mode of the plugin when
retrying.  This is the default.

=back

=head1 FILES

=over 4

=item F<$filterdir/nbdkit-retry-filter.so>

The filter.

Use C<nbdkit --dump-config> to find the location of C<$filterdir>.

=back

=head1 VERSION

C<nbdkit-retry-filter> first appeared in nbdkit 1.16.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-filter(3)>,
L<nbdkit-readahead-filter(1)>,
L<nbdkit-retry-request-filter(1)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright Red Hat
