=head1 NAME

nbdkit-stats-filter - display statistics about operations

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbdkit --filter=stats PLUGIN statsfile=FILE
                       [statsappend=true] [statsthreshold=PERCENTILE]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<nbdkit-stats-filter> is a filter that displays statistics about NBD
operations, such as the number of bytes read and written.  Statistics
are written to a file once when nbdkit exits.

=head1 EXAMPLE OUTPUT

 # nbdkit --filter=exitlast --filter=stats memory 25G statsfile=example.txt
 # nbd-client localhost /dev/nbd1 && mkfs.ext4 /dev/nbd1 && sync &&
   nbd-client -d /dev/nbd1
 [....]
 # cat example.txt
 total: 191 ops, 21.917545 s, 25.13 GiB, 1.15 GiB/s
 read: 136 ops, 0.000230 s, 3.16 MiB, 13.43 GiB/s op, 147.83 KiB/s total
   Request size and alignment breakdown:
     12 bits: 68.4% (93 reqs, 372.00 KiB total)
          12 bit aligned: 100.0% (93)
          13 bit aligned:  72.0% (67)
          14 bit aligned:  55.9% (52)
          15 bit aligned:  48.4% (45)
          16 bit aligned:  43.0% (40)
     14 bits: 10.3% (14 reqs, 296.00 KiB total)
          12 bit aligned: 100.0% (14)
          13 bit aligned:  35.7% (5)
          19 bit aligned:  21.4% (3)
 [....]
     other sizes:  3.7% (5 reqs, 3.16 MiB total)

 write: 36 ops, 0.125460 s, 132.38 MiB, 1.03 GiB/s op, 6.04 MiB/s total
   Request size and alignment breakdown:
     12 bits: 50.0% (18 reqs, 72.00 KiB total)
          12 bit aligned: 100.0% (18)
          13 bit aligned:  77.8% (14)
          27 bit aligned:  72.2% (13)
          31 bit aligned:  66.7% (12)
          32 bit aligned:  33.3% (6)
          33 bit aligned:  22.2% (4)
          34 bit aligned:  11.1% (2)
     14 bits: 30.6% (11 reqs, 224.00 KiB total)
          12 bit aligned: 100.0% (11)
          27 bit aligned:  90.9% (10)
     25 bits: 11.1% (4 reqs, 128.00 MiB total)
          25 bit aligned: 100.0% (4)
          26 bit aligned:  50.0% (2)
          27 bit aligned:  25.0% (1)
     16 bits:  2.8% (1 reqs, 64.00 KiB total)
          16 bit aligned: 100.0% (1)

 trim: 14 ops, 0.002687 s, 25.00 GiB, 9304.06 GiB/s op, 1.14 GiB/s total
   Request size and alignment breakdown:
     31 bits: 85.7% (12 reqs, 24.00 GiB total)
          24 bit aligned: 100.0% (12)
     24 bits:  7.1% (1 reqs, 16.00 MiB total)

 flush: 5 ops, 0.000002 s, 0 bytes, 0 bytes/s op, 0 bytes/s total


=head1 PARAMETERS

=over 4

=item B<statsfile=>FILE

The file where we write the stats.

This parameter is required.

=item B<statsappend=true>

If set then we append to the file instead of replacing it.

=item B<statsthreshold=>PERCENTILE

If non-zero, track request size and alignment distribution and print
histogram.

Requests are grouped by the number of bits that are needed to represent
the request size (e.g. a request of size 3892 needs will be grouped
with all requests of size 2^11=2048 to 2^12-1=4095), and the number of
trailing zero bits in the offset.

Histogram output is truncated to PERCENTILE of requests. Default: 95.

=back

=head1 FILES

=over 4

=item F<$filterdir/nbdkit-stats-filter.so>

The filter.

Use C<nbdkit --dump-config> to find the location of C<$filterdir>.

=back

=head1 VERSION

C<nbdkit-stats-filter> first appeared in nbdkit 1.14.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-filter(3)>,
L<nbdkit-log-filter(1)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones

Nikolaus Rath

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright Red Hat
