=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

nbdkit-offset-filter - nbdkit offset filter

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbdkit --filter=offset plugin offset=OFFSET range=LENGTH [plugin-args...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<nbdkit-offset-filter> is a filter that limits requests to the byte
range C<[offset .. offset+range-1]> within another plugin.

=head1 PARAMETERS

=over 4

=item B<offset=OFFSET>

The start offset.  The offset must be E<ge> 0.

This parameter is optional.  If not given then C<offset=0> is assumed.

=item B<range=LENGTH>

The length of data to serve.

This parameter is optional.  If not given then the range is served
starting from the offset through to the end of the underlying
file/device.

=back

Note it is an error if the offset and/or range specify data which lies
beyond the end of the underlying device.

=head1 EXAMPLES

Using L<nbdkit-file-plugin(1)>, serve the file C<disk.img> starting at
offset C<1M>.  The total length served is C<100M> (the underlying file
must therefore be at least C<101M> in length):

 nbdkit --filter=offset file file=disk.img offset=1M range=100M

One way to serve a single partition from a disk is to find the start
and length of the partition, eg using:

 $ parted disk.img -- unit b print
 ...
 Number  Start   End         Size        Type     File system  Flags
  1      65536B  104792575B  104727040B  primary  ext2

You can then serve the partition only using:

 nbdkit --filter=offset file file=disk.img offset=65536 range=104727040

An easier way to do this is with L<nbdkit-partition-filter(1)>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-file-plugin(1)>,
L<nbdkit-filter(3)>,
L<nbdkit-partition-filter(1)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2018 Red Hat Inc.

=head1 LICENSE

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
met:

=over 4

=item *

Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

=item *

Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

=item *

Neither the name of Red Hat nor the names of its contributors may be
used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without
specific prior written permission.

=back

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY RED HAT AND CONTRIBUTORS ''AS IS'' AND
ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL RED HAT OR
CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF
USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND
ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
SUCH DAMAGE.
