=head1 NAME

nbdkit-S3-plugin - expose data in Amazon S3 or Ceph buckets as block device

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbdkit S3 [access-key=...] [secret-key=...] [session-token=...]
           [endpoint-url=...]
           [size=NN object-size=NN]
           bucket=BUCKET key=STRING

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<nbdkit-S3-plugin> is a plugin for L<nbdkit(1)> which lets you open
objects stored in Amazon S3 or Ceph as disk images.

This plugin uses the Python Amazon Web Services SDK called Boto3.

=head1 EXAMPLES

 nbdkit S3 endpoint-url=https://ceph.example.com \
           bucket=MY-BUCKET key=disk.img


Provides read only block device holding the data contained in the "disk.img"
object.

 nbdkit S3 endpoint-url=https://ceph.example.com \
           size=50G object-size=128k \
           bucket=MY-BUCKET key=disk

Provides a read-write block device with size 50G, whose contents are stored
multiple in objects of size 128k, prefixed with I<disk/>

=head1 PARAMETERS

=over 4

=item B<access-key=>ACCESS_KEY

=item B<secret-key=>SECRET_KEY

=item B<session-token=>SESSION_TOKEN

The AWS credentials may be specified on the command line using these
parameters, but it is more secure to pass them using files (see
L</CREDENTIALS> below).

=item B<endpoint-url=>ENDPOINT

If accessing Ceph or another compatible S3 service, provide the
endpoint URL through this parameter.

=item B<bucket=>BUCKET

The bucket containing the object(s).  This parameter is required.

=item B<key=>STRING

The object name (if C<size> is not specified) or object prefix (if
C<size> is specified) to use within the bucket.  This parameter is
required.

=item B<size=>SIZE

=item B<object-size=>SIZE

These two parameters must always be specified together. If set, data
will be split into blocks of C<object-size> and stored as separate
objects. The block device will report a total size of C<size> and be
writeable and trim-able.

Object names will have the form I<key/%16x>, where C<%16x> is the
16-digit hexadecimal block number. If there are existing objects
under such name that do not have the expected size, the plugin
will crash.

=back

=head1 PERFORMANCE CONSIDERATIONS

It is highly recommended that clients do their utmost to issue
requests that exactly match the object size: Smaller write requests
will incur a performance penalty due to the need for read-modify-write
cycles (thus also incurring latency from two network
round-trips). Larger read and write requests will incur a performance
penalty because of sequential execution.

The L<nbdkit-blocksize-filter(1)> can be used to alleviate the impact
of requests larger than the object size, but does not help if the
client issues requests smaller than the block size.

The L<nbdkit-stats-filter(1)> can be used to investigate what block
sizes and alignments are used by the client.

When connecting through the Linux kernel's NBD module, consider
setting C</sys/block/nbdE<lt>XE<gt>/queue/max_sectors_kb> to match the
object size.

=head1 CREDENTIALS

Although AWS credentials can be passed to nbdkit on the command line,
this is not secure since a user on the same machine could read them
using L<ps(1)>.

A better way is to pass the credentials through the
F<~/.aws/credentials> file.  This takes the form:

 [default]
 aws_access_key_id = XXX
 aws_secret_access_key = YYY

 [profile]
 aws_access_key_id = XXX
 aws_secret_access_key = YYY

Different profiles from the file can be selected by setting
the C<AWS_PROFILE> environment variable.

There is much more information about credentials in
L<the Boto3 documentation|https://boto3.amazonaws.com/v1/documentation/api/latest/guide/credentials.html>.

=head1 COMPARISON TO S3FS-FUSE AND S3BACKER

s3fs-fuse (L<https://github.com/s3fs-fuse/s3fs-fuse>) and s3backer
(L<https://github.com/archiecobbs/s3backer>) provide similar
functionality but are based on FUSE (rather than NBD). They provide a
regular file (backed by S3) which can then be loopback-mounted to
provide a block device. s3backer also supports to optionally encrypt
and compress objects.

In theory, NBD should provide better performance than FUSE, because:

=over 4

=item * The kernel no longer serializes write and read requests but
issues them concurrently.

=item * Read and write request size can exceed 128 kB

=item * The system can still be reliably hibernated (a running FUSE
daemon may prevent this)

=item * Requests pass through the VFS only once, not twice

=item * Data is present in the page cache only once, not twice

=back

However, for high-bandwith network connections s3backer and s3fs-fuse
may be faster because they are written in C rather than Python.

=head1 FILES

=over 4

=item F<$plugindir/nbdkit-S3-plugin>

The plugin.

Use C<nbdkit --dump-config> to find the location of C<$plugindir>.

=item F<$HOME/.aws/credentials>

AWS credentials can be passed to boto3 using this file.

=back

=head1 ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

=over 4

=item C<AWS_*>

Boto3 reads some credential information from C<AWS_*> environment variables.

=back

=head1 VERSION

C<nbdkit-S3-plugin> first appeared in nbdkit 1.24.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-plugin(3)>,
L<nbdkit-python-plugin(3)>,
L<https://pypi.org/project/boto3/>,
L<https://boto3.amazonaws.com/v1/documentation/api/latest/index.html>,
L<https://boto3.amazonaws.com/v1/documentation/api/latest/guide/credentials.html>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones

Nikolaus Rath

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2020-2022 Red Hat Inc.
